Who’s Running for President in 2020? - The New York Times
NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
LEARN MORE »
Sections
Home
Search
The New York Times
Politics
|Who’s Running for President in 2020?
Log In
0
Settings
Close search
Site Search Navigation
Search NYTimes.com
Clear this text input
Go
https://nyti.ms/2HpNjgP
Loading...
See next articles
See previous articles
Site Navigation
Site Mobile Navigation
Advertisement
Politics
Who’s Running for President in 2020?
UPDATED APRIL 9, 2019
Running
20
Running
Booker
Buttigieg
Castro
Delaney
Gabbard
Gillibrand
Harris
Hickenlooper
Inslee
Klobuchar
Messam
O’Rourke
Ryan
Sanders
Swalwell
Warren
Williamson
Yang
Trump
Weld
Likely to Run
2
Likely to Run
Biden
Bullock
Might Run
7
Might Run
Abrams
Bennet
McAuliffe
Moulton
Schultz
May run as Ind.
Hogan
Kasich
Unlikely to Run
3
Unlikely to Run
de Blasio
Kerry
Landrieu
Not Running
12
Not Running
Bloomberg
Brown
Casey
Clinton
Garcetti
Holder
Merkley
Murphy
Ojeda
Dropped out
Patrick
Steyer
Winfrey
They are thinking. Weighing. And, in many cases, already campaigning.
It can feel as if half the Democratic Party is setting off on a White House run. In fact, it’s only 18 or so, officially. And the number is growing. The next couple weeks could pad the field even more, to say nothing of the handful of Republicans primed to join the pack. Below, an accounting of who’s in, who’s out and who’s somewhere in between.
Running
Cory Booker, 49
Senator from New Jersey; former mayor of Newark
Democrat
“I believe that we can build a country where no one is forgotten, no one is left behind … where we see the faces of our leaders on television and feel pride, not shame.”
Would be one of the most gifted orators in the field, running on a politics of uplift that could recall President Obama’s 2008 campaign.
Enjoys a vast fund-raising base, thanks to longstanding connections to donors around the country.
Signature issues: Has been one of the leaders in the Senate on criminal justice reform, but his appeal would most likely center on his call to unify the country.
Pete Buttigieg, 37
Mayor of South Bend, Ind.; military veteran
Democrat
“I launched a presidential exploratory committee because it is a season for boldness and it is time to focus on the future.”
Began to draw national notice after delivering an essay that counseled Democrats on how to recover from their defeats in the 2016 elections.
Has embarked on a long-shot campaign that may test the appeal of a youthful profile over more traditional qualifications.
Signature issues: Has stressed his generational identity and called for policies on issues like climate change and economic opportunity.
Julián Castro, 44
Former housing secretary; former mayor of San Antonio
Democrat
“I’m running for president because it’s time for new leadership. Because it’s time for new energy.”
Opted out of challenging Senator Ted Cruz for the Senate in the 2018 midterm elections.
Once a rising political star, has struggled to find a role during the Trump administration.
Money could be an issue, especially if former Representative Beto O’Rourke, a small donor magnet, also mounts a bid.
Signature issues: Has emphasized a platform of universal prekindergarten, “Medicare for all” and immigration reform.
John Delaney, 55
Former congressman from Maryland; former businessman
Democrat
“I think I’m the right person for the job, but not enough people knew who I was or still know who I am.”
Was elected to the House in 2012 as a “pragmatic idealist,” in his telling.
Has been running aggressively since 2017.
Has already visited every county in Iowa, though it’s unclear if he has improved his long-shot prospects.
Signature issues: Has pitched himself as a bipartisan problem-solver, but has also endorsed liberal causes like universal health care.
Tulsi Gabbard, 37
Congresswoman from Hawaii; Army National Guard veteran
Democrat
“There are a lot of challenges that are facing the American people that I’m concerned about and that I want to help solve.”
Supported Bernie Sanders in the 2016 primaries.
Has drawn condemnation for meeting with Syria’s president, Bashar al-Assad, whose regime has been accused of using chemical weapons against civilians.
Has apologized for her history of anti-gay statements and her past work for an anti-gay advocacy group.
Signature issue: Opposition to American military intervention overseas, including in countries like Syria.
Kirsten Gillibrand, 52
Senator from New York; former congresswoman
Democrat
“I’m going to run for president of the United States because as a young mom I am going to fight for other people’s kids as hard as I would fight for my own.”
Was once a congresswoman from a conservative House district (with policy positions to match).
Has transformed herself into a progressive champion in President Trump’s Washington, becoming one of the Senate’s leading liberal voices.
Signature issue: Has long placed women’s equality and opportunity at the center of her policy agenda.
Kamala Harris, 54
Senator from California; former attorney general of California; former San Francisco district attorney
Democrat
“I believe our country wants and needs some leadership that provides a vision of the country in which everyone could see themselves.”
Would bring a star power and history-making potential to the race that few other Democrats can match.
One of few new Democrats to join the Senate after 2016.
Quickly drew notice for her tough questioning of Mr. Trump’s cabinet nominees — and later, his Supreme Court nominee Brett M. Kavanaugh.
Signature issues: Unveiled middle-class tax cut legislation last fall, and has championed a liberal civil rights agenda in the Senate.
John Hickenlooper, 67
Former governor of Colorado; former mayor of Denver
Democrat
“I’ve proven again and again I can bring people together to produce the progressive change Washington has failed to deliver.”
A political moderate with a record of success in a purple state.
A former geologist who struck it rich when he opened a brewery in Denver.
Will probably cast himself as someone who can attract support from a broad coalition, though some of his victories entailed cutting deals with the Republican business establishment.
Signature issues: Has stressed his record of consensus-building around issues like expanding Medicaid, gay rights and gun control.
Jay Inslee, 68
Governor of Washington State; former congressman
Democrat
“I’m running for president because I am the only candidate who will make defeating climate change our nation’s No. 1 priority.”
A two-term governor known for his environmental policies.
Has become one of the party’s most forceful climate advocates, calling on Democrats to embrace a green-energy jobs program.
Signature issues: Has made climate a centerpiece of his agenda as governor and as a national figure, campaigning widely in the midterm elections on a message of creating renewable energy jobs.
Amy Klobuchar, 58
Senator from Minnesota; former Hennepin County, Minn., attorney
Democrat
“It is time to organize, time to galvanize, time to take back our democracy.”
Became a hero to many Democrats for her stern, cool questioning of Brett M. Kavanaugh during his confirmation hearings.
Has called for Democrats to focus on reclaiming the swing states in the middle of the country.
Signature issues: Has championed legislation to combat the opioid crisis and drug addiction, and to address the cost of prescription drugs.
Wayne Messam, 44
Mayor of Miramar, Fla.; former college football champion
Democrat
“America belongs to all of us. The promise of America belongs to all of us. That’s why I’m going to be running for president. To be your champion.”
Defeated a long-time incumbent to become his city’s first black mayor.
Has taken progressive stances on guns, immigration and environmental issues.
A first-generation American born to Jamaican parents, he is hoping to tap into the Caribbean-American community to help fuel his long-shot bid.
Signature issue: Has proposed canceling the more than $1.5 trillion in student debt owed by 44 million Americans.
Beto O’Rourke, 46
Former congressman from Texas; 2018 Senate candidate
Democrat
“This is going to be a positive campaign that seeks to bring out the very best from every single one of us, that seeks to unite a divided country.”
Became a celebrity of Democratic politics in the Trump age, and narrowly lost to Senator Ted Cruz in 2018.
Has delivered a message of national unity and red-state liberalism via constant social media livestreaming to voters inside and outside Texas.
Any success in 2020 would draw from this viral appeal, particularly to younger Democrats, and from the small-dollar fund-raising army it has earned him.
Signature issues: Has focused on immigration reform, marijuana legalization and rural hospital access.
Tim Ryan, 45
Congressman from Ohio; former congressional staffer
Democrat
“I’ve watched the American Dream slip through the fingers of many Americans ... It’s time for us to start building the America we deserve.”
Joined Congress at age 29 and has positioned himself as a voice for blue-collar voters in the Midwest.
Challenged Nancy Pelosi for House minority leader after the 2016 election, winning 63 votes to her 134.
Once an opponent of abortion rights, gradually reversed his position and announced in 2015 he considered abortion a “personal choice.”
Signature issues: Renegotiating or enforcing trade deals; punishing Chinese currency manipulation; unions rights and workforce development.
Bernie Sanders, 77
Senator from Vermont; former congressman
Democrat
“The only way we will win this election and create a government and economy that work for all is with a grassroots movement — the likes of which has never been seen in American history.”
A self-described democratic socialist.
Was the runner-up in the 2016 Democratic primary.
Would begin a second White House race with a more extensive organization-in-waiting than any other candidate in the Democratic primary.
Might face difficulties retaining the level of support he enjoyed in what was effectively a head-to-head race against Hillary Clinton.
Signature issues: “Medicare for all,” free college tuition and curtailing the influence of, as he calls them, “the billionaires.”
Eric Swalwell, 38
Congressman from California
Democrat
“The biggest question that any candidate should ask themselves is, ‘Can you make a difference for the people who you’d serve?’ And I believe I could.”
Has a growing national profile, thanks to his popularity as a cable news guest.
As a member of the House Judiciary and Intelligence Committees, could have a high-profile presence on issues like impeachment and the Russia investigation.
Signature issues: Has stressed his experience as a prosecutor to investigate the Trump administration; proposed funding for innovation in medical research; pushed for a national ban on assault weapons.
Elizabeth Warren, 69
Senator from Massachusetts; former Harvard professor
Democrat
“It’s time for women to go to Washington and fix our broken government, and that includes a woman at the top.”
Has done some of the most extensive preparations for a presidential run.
Attempted to dispatch questions about her Native American heritage by releasing the results of a DNA test.
That effort raised questions about her readiness for a national bid.
Signature issues: Income inequality and what she sees as a middle class under attack from big corporations and political corruption.
Marianne Williamson, 66
Self-help author, new age lecturer
Democrat
“We need a moral and spiritual awakening in the country … Nothing short of that is adequate to fundamentally change the patterns of our political dysfunction.”
The author of more than a dozen self-help and spirituality books.
Ran for Congress as an independent in 2014, and lost.
Championed the rights of gay men with AIDS, founding a charity that now supplies meals to people with serious illnesses.
Signature issues: Has proposed $100 billion in reparations for slavery, with $10 billion to be distributed annually over a decade for economic and education projects.
Andrew Yang, 44
Former tech executive who founded an economic development nonprofit
Democrat
“Universal basic income is an old idea, but it’s an old idea that right now is uniquely relevant because of what we’re experiencing in society.”
Is running a long-shot campaign on a proposal to establish a universal basic income funded by the government.
Has drawn some media attention for highlighting tech issues like robotics and artificial intelligence.
Signature issue: Establishing a universal basic income of $1,000 per month for all Americans.
Donald J. Trump, 72
U.S. president; real estate developer; reality television star
Republican
“Considering that we have done more than any administration in the first two years, this should be easy. More great things now in the works!”
Main legislative accomplishment as president: a sweeping tax cut that chiefly benefited corporations and wealthy investors.
Has focused on undoing the policies of the Obama administration, including on health care, environmental regulation and immigration.
Faces multiple serious legal investigations, though the recent report by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, found no evidence he coordinated with Russia’s 2016 election interference.
Signature issues: Restricting immigration and building a wall at the Mexican border; renegotiating or canceling international deals on trade, arms control and climate change; withdrawing American troops from overseas.
William F. Weld, 73
Former governor of Massachusetts; former federal prosecutor
Republican
“I hope to see the Republican Party assume once again the mantle of being the party of Lincoln.”
Ran for vice president on the Libertarian Party ticket in 2016.
Is exploring a primary challenge to Mr. Trump, presenting himself as a voice for alienated moderates and mainstream conservatives.
Emerged as a vocal critic of Mr. Trump during the 2016 election, saying his call to deport immigrants evoked Kristallnacht.
Signature issues: Favors fiscal restraint, free trade and moderate immigration reform; has endorsed steps to legalize marijuana.
Likely to Run
Joseph R. Biden Jr., 76
Former vice president; former senator from Delaware
Democrat
“I think I’m the most qualified person in the country to be president.”
Has run for president twice before.
Is among the best-liked figures in the Democratic Party, known for his down-to-earth personality and his ability to connect with working-class voters.
Regards 2020 as his last chance to run for president.
Signature issues: Restoring America’s standing on the global stage; strengthening economic protections for low-income workers in industries like manufacturing and fast food.
Steve Bullock, 52
Governor of Montana; former state attorney general
Democrat
“I do have a story of how I’ve been able to bring people together, and I think that’s in part what our country desperately needs.”
Democratic governor of a state that Mr. Trump won easily in 2016.
Would offer himself as a bridge to rural America.
Came out in favor of an assault weapons ban, despite overseeing a state that prizes hunting.
Signature issues: Expected to make campaign finance reform a priority, while also pushing early childhood education and other policies aimed at reducing economic inequality.
Might Run
Stacey Abrams, 45
2018 Democratic nominee for governor of Georgia; former state legislator
Democrat
“Now, I’m not saying I would be the best candidate, but I’m not going to dismiss it out of hand the way others do.”
Was a breakout star of the 2018 midterm elections, nearly flipping a long-red state.
Refused to concede in the race, citing the “systemic disenfranchisement” of many of her supporters in her campaign against Brian Kemp, now the governor.
Michael Bennet, 54
Senator from Colorado
Democrat
“I think having one more voice in that conversation that’s focused on America’s future, I don’t think would hurt.”
A moderate Democrat known for bipartisanship.
Does not have nearly the national profile of some Senate peers considering a run, but is weighing whether there is room in the field for a less fiery Democrat.
Terry McAuliffe, 62
Former governor of Virginia; former chairman of the Democratic National Committee
Democrat
“While I haven’t decided whether to be a candidate myself, I will be closely watching our side and working to ensure that the Democratic message is realistic, optimistic and focused on helping all Americans.”
A fixture in Democratic Party politics who became a successful governor.
Would highlight the economic record and social policies he has championed, including legalizing gay marriage and restoring felon voting rights.
Some around him are unsure there’s a road to the presidency for an establishment white male politician with close ties to the Clinton family.
Seth Moulton, 40
Congressman from Massachusetts; Iraq War veteran
Democrat
“I’m not definitely running, but I’m going to take a very hard look at it … Because I believe it’s time for a new generation of leadership, and we’ve got to send Donald Trump packing.”
Won his congressional seat in 2014 after ousting a longtime Democratic incumbent.
Has made his military service a key piece of his political brand.
Helped lead an effort to oppose electing Representative Nancy Pelosi speaker in the new Congress.
Howard Schultz, 65
Former chief executive of Starbucks
May run as Independent
“Republicans and Democrats alike — who no longer see themselves as part of the far extreme of the far right and the far left — are looking for a home. The word ‘independent,’ for me, is simply a designation on the ballot.”
Has long mused about making the jump from the boardroom to politics. A self-described “lifelong Democrat,” has come under fire from fellow party members as well as President Trump for taking steps to prepare to run for president as an independent.
Larry Hogan, 62
Governor of Maryland
Republican
“Nobody has successfully challenged a sitting president in the same party in a primary since 1884. I know I’m the second Republican in the history of Maryland ... that's probably about the same odds.”
Elected twice as a Republican governor in deeply blue Maryland and argues he could win over independents and Democrats.
Is being courted by Trump antagonists to challenge Mr. Trump in the Republican primary.
John Kasich, 66
Former governor of Ohio; former congressman from Ohio
Republican
“Do I run because I’ve determined that I can win, or is it important for me to make such a good showing that I can send a message that can disrupt the political system in this country?”
Ran for the Republican presidential nomination twice.
A staunch critic of Mr. Trump, has spent much of the past two years publicly weighing whether to run again.
As governor, expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act and pushed for new gun restrictions after recent mass shootings.
Unlikely to Run
Democrat
Bill de Blasio, 57
Mayor of New York City
Could credibly make the case that he has fused liberal policy feats like universal prekindergarten with falling crime and a sturdy economy.
Past forays into national politics, like a progressive nonprofit and a halting endorsement of Hillary Clinton, have ended in disaster.
Democrat
John Kerry, 75
Former secretary of state; former senator from Massachusetts
The 2004 Democratic nominee and President Obama’s chief diplomat.
Author of a recent memoir about his life and, at 75, was thought to be done with politics.
Is deeply upset about the Trump presidency and has indicated he would like to continue to play a role in public life.
Democrat
Mitch Landrieu, 58
Former mayor of New Orleans; former lieutenant governor of Louisiana
Controversial decision to remove his city’s Confederate monuments vaulted him into the national political conversation.
Has drawn considerable attention from Democratic donors and political strategists.
Not Running
Michael R. Bloomberg, 77
Billionaire media executive; former mayor of New York City
Democrat
“I hope those who have urged me to run — and to stand up for the values and principles that they hold dear — will understand that my decision was guided by one question: How can I best serve the country?”
Sherrod Brown, 66
Senator from Ohio; former congressman
Democrat
“I will keep fighting for all workers across the country. And I will do everything I can to elect a Democratic president and a Democratic Senate in 2020. The best place for me to make that fight is in the United States Senate.”
Bob Casey, 58
Senator from Pennsylvania
Democrat
“I have concluded that the best way for me to fight for America ... is to stay in the U.S. Senate and not run for the presidency in 2020.”
Hillary Clinton, 71
Former secretary of state; former senator from New York; former first lady; 2016 Democratic presidential nominee
Democrat
“I’m not running. But I'm going to keep on working and speaking and standing up for what I believe.”
Eric Garcetti, 48
Mayor of Los Angeles; former City Council president
Democrat
“I am so excited to finish the work that we have begun here in Los Angeles. So I have decided not to throw my hat into the race for president in 2020.”
Eric H. Holder Jr., 68
Former attorney general; anti-gerrymandering activist
Democrat
“Though I will not run for president in 2020, I will continue to fight for the future of our country through the National Democratic Redistricting Committee and its affiliates.”
Jeff Merkley, 62
Senator from Oregon; former speaker of the Oregon House of Representatives
Democrat
“I’m going to work to fix our broken and dysfunctional Senate so it isn’t just a graveyard for good ideas. To fix America we must fix the Senate.”
Christopher S. Murphy, 45
Senator from Connecticut; former congressman
Democrat
“Am I ruling it out? Here we go, I’ll rule it out for you.”
Richard Ojeda, 48
Former West Virginia state senator; military veteran
Democrat
Dropped out
“When I was a child, my grade school teachers told us all that anyone in America could grow up and become president. I now realize that this is not the case.”
Deval Patrick, 62
Former governor of Massachusetts
Democrat
“After a lot of conversation, reflection and prayer, I’ve decided that a 2020 campaign for president is not for me.”
Tom Steyer, 61
Billionaire former hedge-fund executive; climate change and impeachment activist
Democrat
“Most people come to Iowa around this time to announce a campaign for president. But I am proud to be here to announce that I will do whatever it takes, for as long as it takes, to remove a president.”
Oprah Winfrey, 65
Media mogul; former talk show host; philanthropist
Democrat
“I would not be able to do it. It’s not a clean business. It would kill me.”
By ALEXANDER BURNS,
MATT FLEGENHEIMER,
JASMINE C. LEE,
LISA LERER and
JONATHAN MARTIN
Additional reporting by Isabella Grullón Paz.
More on NYTimes.com
Advertisement
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Home
Search
Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
Contact Us
Work With Us
Advertise
Your Ad Choices
Privacy
Terms of Service
Terms of Sale
Site Information Navigation
Site Map
Help
Site Feedback
SubscriptionsTrump on Making Mueller Report Public: ‘It Depends’ - Video - NYTimes.com
Channels & Shows
Home
Search
U.S. & Politics
Log In
Channels
U.S.
International
Times Documentaries
The Daily 360
New York
Op-Docs
Opinion
Business
Culture
Technology
Style
T Magazine
Health
Food
Travel
Sports
Real Estate
Science
Magazine
Obituaries
Recent
Videos
Related Articles:
Trump Won’t Commit to Making Mueller Report Public
Recent Episodes in
U.S. & Politics
Politics
2:28
Who Is Pete Buttigieg? | 2020 Presidential Candidate
Immigration
0:36
Trump Offers ‘Unlimited Supply’ of Migrants to ‘Sanctuary Cities’
U.S. & Politics
0:30
Sanders Unveils Bill, Saying ‘Health Care Is a Human Right’
Venezuela News
0:35
Maduro’s ‘Time Is Up,’ Pence Tells U.N.
U.S. & Politics
0:45
Barr Says He Will Review ‘Spying’ on Trump Campaign
U.S.
0:44
Astronomers Reveal the First Picture of a Black Hole
U.S. & Politics
1:01
Waters Tells Mnuchin, ‘If You Wish to Leave, You May’
U.S. & Politics
0:42
Barr Says He’ll Release the Mueller Report ‘Within a Week’
Terrorism and Attacks
0:43
U.S. Announces Aggressive Move Against Arm of Iranian Military
White House Exits
2:03
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen Exits Trump’s Cabinet
U.S. & Politics
0:28
Biden Says He’s Sorry, and Not Sorry
U.S. & Politics
0:48
‘He Gave Me Permission’: Biden Tries to Push Past Touching Controversy
Show more videos from U.S. & Politics
Most Popular
1 U.S.
Paul Manafort’s Trail of Scandals
2 Opinion
My Dead Dad’s Porno Tapes
3 Opinion
Ten Meter Tower
4 Opinion
Between Sound and Silence
5 Opinion
Coal Miner to Trump: “Coal Mining Isn’t Coming Back”
6 T Magazine
House Tour | Cary Leibowitz
7 Opinion
Sanctuary City Hotline
8 World
2011: Arab Spring
9 U.S.
‘Can The President Be Impeached?’ We Answer Your Questions
10 Opinion
Calving Season
© 2019 New York Times Company
Contact Us
Work with Us
Advertising
Ad Choice
Privacy
Terms of Service
Terms of Sale
RSS
Help
Site FeedbackTrump Won’t Commit to Making Mueller Report Public - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Trump Won’t Commit to Making Mueller Report PublicAdvertisementSupported byTrump Won’t Commit to Making Mueller Report PublicVideoPresident Trump said he would leave it up to the attorney general whether to release the findings of the special counsel’s Russia investigation to the public.CreditCreditSarah Silbiger/The New York TimesBy Katie RogersFeb. 3, 2019WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. — President Trump would not commit in an interview aired Sunday to making public the results of the special counsel’s investigation into Russia’s ties to his campaign, adding that it was time to “get rid” of the inquiry.In the interview on CBS’s “Face the Nation,” Mr. Trump reiterated his belief that the attorney general would determine whether the public would see the results of the inquiry by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. But he would not say whether he would be comfortable with the results being made public.“I don’t know,” the president said. “It depends. I have no idea what it’s going to say.”The law does not require the Justice Department to release a report, and Mr. Mueller has been silent on the issue. Last month, Trump advisers were pleased that William P. Barr, Mr. Trump’s nominee for attorney general, opened the door to the possibility that the special counsel’s report could be shielded from the public during a Senate confirmation hearing.Mr. Trump’s wide-ranging interview with Margaret Brennan, the show’s host, was conducted days after the acting attorney general, Matthew G. Whitaker, said the investigation was nearing its end, and amid stagnant negotiations with Democrats over Mr. Trump’s demand for a border wall. Mr. Trump indicated at various points in the interview that he would use the power of his office to solve that matter and others facing his presidency.Among those matters, the president appeared to suggest, are national security and the military. He called the use of military force against Venezuela “an option.” And he indicated that he would like to keep troops in Iraq — a striking departure from his push to withdraw from Afghanistan and Syria — to “keep an eye” on Iran.“It’s perfectly situated for looking at all over different parts of the troubled Middle East rather than pulling up,” Mr. Trump said. “We’re going to keep watching and we’re going to keep seeing and if there’s trouble, if somebody is looking to do nuclear weapons or other things, we’re going to know it before they do.”On the border wall fight, the president reiterated his belief that “we have now set the table” to take action after a short-term deal to fund part of the government — a deal struck to end the longest government shutdown in history — expires on Feb. 15. In an interview with The New York Times on Thursday, Mr. Trump suggested that he had successfully made the case to Americans that the problem at the border was enough to constitute declaring a national emergency, and that Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, was doing a “disservice” to the country — both points he again made on Sunday.“People that didn’t have any idea,” Mr. Trump said. “They didn’t have a clue as to what was happening. They now know exactly what’s happening.”Mr. Trump is expected to make immigration a cornerstone of his State of the Union speech, which is scheduled for Tuesday. In the interview with CBS, Mr. Trump once again accused Democrats, in particular Ms. Pelosi, of ignoring urgent problems at the border, which included human trafficking and what Mr. Trump called an “invasion” of human traffickers into the country.Though Mr. Trump seems intent on ignoring congressional negotiations, lawmakers insisted on Sunday that they were still trying. Senator Richard C. Shelby, the chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee and a member of the committee working to reach a deal, admitted that it was too early to say whether the negotiations could be successful.“I think that the president is dead set on keeping his campaign promise,” Mr. Shelby, Republican of Alabama, said on CNN’s “State of the Union.” He acknowledged that Mr. Trump probably had some legal merits for declaring a national emergency over the border wall, but he pleaded for the committee to be allowed to do its work.“If people leave us alone,” Mr. Shelby added, “we’ll get this done by Wednesday night.”He said that the committee had invited experts with knowledge of the southwestern border to testify this week on exactly what is needed for border security. Mr. Shelby expressed optimism that hearing from those experts “could move us off of” the semantic debate over a wall or fencing.ImageThe acting attorney general, Matthew G. Whitaker, said last week that the inquiry into the Trump campaign’s ties with Russia was nearing its end.CreditSarah Silbiger/The New York Times“It’s a question of how do we get off the politics and on to the substance,” he said.Other members of the bipartisan committee — Representative Henry Cuellar, Democrat of Texas, and Senator John Hoeven, Republican of North Dakota — doubled down on their respective party’s positions on “Fox News Sunday.” Mr. Cuellar, who represents parts of the border, dismissed the president’s reasoning for the wall as built on “a false premise.”In the CBS interview, Mr. Trump fought back against criticism of his wall and other policies. He responded to warnings that his administration was risking a resurgence of terrorist groups by promising the rapid withdrawal of troops from Syria and Afghanistan by saying that he “ran against 17 Republicans” and won.“I’ll leave intelligence there,” Mr. Trump said, “and if I see nests forming, I’ll do something about it.”Last week, Mr. Trump showed similar defiance in suggesting that his intelligence chiefs “go back to school” for issuing a threat assessment saying that North Korea was unlikely to give up its nuclear program and that Iran is not, for now, taking steps necessary to make a bomb.Mr. Trump said that he would ultimately rely on his own counsel if he disagreed with intelligence assessments.The president also indicated that the power of his affectionate letter writing with Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, might persuade Mr. Kim to drop his nuclear plans. Mr. Trump has at least six letters from Mr. Kim that he enjoys sharing with people who visit him in the Oval Office.“We have had tremendous correspondence that some people have seen and can’t even believe it,” Mr. Trump said. “Now that doesn’t mean we’re going to make a deal. But certainly I think we have a very good chance of making a deal.”Other leaders did not receive such praise. Mr. Trump said that he had declined a meeting with Nicolás Maduro, the embattled president of Venezuela, days after the Trump administration said it recognized Juan Guaidó, the 35-year-old opposition figure, as the country’s rightful leader.“I decided at the time, ‘no,’ because so many really horrible things have been happening in Venezuela when you look at that country,” Mr. Trump said.With his cabinet in flux, Mr. Trump dismissed as “fake news” the reports that Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, had asked Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state and his most visible emissary in negotiations with North Korea, to consider leaving to run for a Senate seat in Kansas.Mr. Pompeo confirmed that discussion over a week ago. The secretary of state said that he had appreciated the call, but that he had a “very full plate.”The CBS interview was broadcast during the president’s first visit in months to Mar-a-Lago, his Florida estate, where he spent Saturday golfing with Tiger Woods and Jack Nicklaus. On Sunday, the president hit the golf course again amid planning for his annual Super Bowl party.The president told CBS that he loved to watch football, but that he would not encourage his youngest son, Barron, 12, to participate in such a dangerous sport.Emily Cochrane contributed reporting from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: In Interview, Trump Refuses to Commit to Releasing Mueller Report. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsMatthew Whitaker Says He Has Not Interfered in the Mueller Investigation - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Matthew Whitaker Says He Has Not Interfered in the Mueller InvestigationAdvertisementSupported byMatthew Whitaker Says He Has Not Interfered in the Mueller InvestigationImageMatthew G. Whitaker, the acting attorney general, testified Friday before the House Judiciary Committee.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesBy Charlie Savage, Nicholas Fandos and Katie BennerFeb. 8, 2019WASHINGTON — Matthew G. Whitaker, the acting attorney general, told Congress on Friday that he had “not interfered in any way with the special counsel’s investigation” into Russia’s 2016 election-manipulation operation since President Trump installed him atop the Justice Department.During an often contentious oversight hearing before the House Judiciary Committee, Mr. Whitaker also testified that he had provided no inside information about that inquiry, or related ones in the Southern District of New York, to Mr. Trump or his lawyers and White House aides.“I do not believe that I have briefed third-party individuals outside of the Department of Justice,” Mr. Whitaker said. “I have received the briefings myself, and I’m usually the endpoint of that information.”While Mr. Whitaker provided those bottom-line claims up front, he refused to discuss many other things — like his conversations with Mr. Trump, or why he recently said the special counsel inquiry would soon wrap up — as questions about the Russia investigation dominated the hearing. The committee chairman, Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York, told Mr. Whitaker that he would seek to force him to submit to further questioning in a later deposition.After taking control of the House in the midterm elections, Democrats made it an early priority to get Mr. Whitaker in front of the oversight committee before his expected replacement by William P. Barr, whom the Senate is likely to confirm next week as attorney general. Mr. Whitaker’s voluntary appearance followed a last-minute fight with Democrats on Thursday over whether they would commit to not serving him with a subpoena before or on Friday — a precursor to potentially citing him for contempt of Congress.The hearing also touched on a series of other topics. Among them, Mr. Whitaker denied that the Justice Department had recently decided to issue a legal opinion restricting online gambling — reversing an interpretation the department had issued in 2011 — as a gift to casino owners like Sheldon G. Adelson, the casino magnate and a major Republican donor. Mr. Whitaker said he had no involvement in the opinion, but rejected as “absolutely wrong” the premise that the process was corrupt.But the hearing focused mainly on the Russia investigation. It quickly became contentious, as Mr. Nadler used his opening statement to blast Mr. Whitaker for refusing to recuse himself from overseeing the Russia investigation despite the recommendation of Justice Department ethics officials that he step aside because of his past public comments criticizing it.VideoMatthew G. Whitaker, the acting attorney general, said that he had provided no information to President Trump or White House officials about the special counsel’s Russia investigation.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesThe panel’s ranking Republican, Representative Doug Collins of Georgia, in turn accused Mr. Nadler of engaging in “character assassination” and “political theater” and of wasting time by obtaining authority to subpoena Mr. Whitaker. Mr. Collins then forced an unsuccessful roll-call vote on whether to immediately adjourn the hearing.And when Mr. Nadler began questioning Mr. Whitaker, the acting attorney general refused to provide details about when and how many times he had been briefed about the Russia investigation, which is led by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. Then, when Mr. Nadler asked Mr. Whitaker if he had ever been asked to approve any request for action to be taken by Mr. Mueller, Mr. Whitaker audaciously replied: “Mr. Chairman, I see that your five minutes is up.”The room broke into laughter as Mr. Nadler looked up in apparent disbelief at the breach of decorum, but then grinned himself and let it slide, noting that he did not enforce the five-minute rule during Mr. Whitaker’s opening statement. Mr. Nadler then directed Mr. Whitaker to “answer the question, please.”Mr. Whitaker’s retorts to lawmakers soon irked Democrats. “Mr. Attorney General, we are not joking here,” said Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, Democrat of Texas, during one exchange. “And your humor is not acceptable.”But as a matter of substance, the takeaway was that Mr. Whitaker testified under oath that he had never used his position to provide inside information about the Russia inquiry to Mr. Trump or his proxies, nor had he taken any step to impede Mr. Mueller’s work — both fears that Democrats have repeatedly expressed since Mr. Trump installed him as acting head of the department.“I want to be very specific about this, Mr. Chairman, because I think it will allay a lot of fears that have existed among this committee, among the legislative branch, largely, and maybe amongst some American people,” Mr. Whitaker said. “We have followed the special counsel’s regulations to a T. There’s been no event, no decision that has required me to take any action, and I’ve not interfered in any way with the special counsel’s investigation.”Mr. Whitaker pointedly declined at multiple points, though, to defend Mr. Mueller and his investigation from accusations by Mr. Trump or others that he was conducting a “witch hunt.”Several moments in Mr. Whitaker’s testimony were notable because they raised potential tensions with news reports. For example, CNN reported in December that Mr. Trump had yelled at Mr. Whitaker after two developments in the case involving the president’s former lawyer and fixer, Michael D. Cohen, that rattled the White House: Mr. Cohen’s decision to plead guilty to lying about the Trump Organization’s work on a tower project in Moscow and the fact that the president was identified as Individual-1 in the Cohen plea papers.ImageRepresentative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, during the hearing.CreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesRepresentative David Cicilline, Democrat of Rhode Island, brought up that report and asked whether it was true that Mr. Trump had lashed out at Mr. Whitaker, who at first seemed to demur, noting that Mr. Trump had said on Twitter that he did not lash out.But Mr. Cicilline, saying he did not have confidence in the veracity of what Mr. Trump tweets, pressed Mr. Whitaker to answer under oath about whether the president had lashed out or otherwise expressed dissatisfaction over the Cohen case developments.“No, he did not,” Mr. Whitaker said.Mr. Whitaker also told several lawmakers that he had never talked to anyone at the White House or in Mr. Trump’s circle about his views of the Mueller inquiry before joining the Justice Department in September 2017 as chief of staff to Jeff Sessions, then the attorney general.Mr. Whitaker had made public comments that were skeptical of the Russia investigation during that period, and The New York Times has reported that in July 2017, Mr. Whitaker had interviewed with Donald F. McGahn II, then serving as Mr. Trump’s White House counsel, about the possibility of becoming the main White House lawyer who would manage and respond to the Mueller investigation. The White House instead ended up giving that job to Ty Cobb.Later, under questioning by Representative Eric Swalwell, Democrat of California, Mr. Whitaker acknowledged having applied for the job that went to Mr. Cobb. But he said he had spoken only with Mr. McGahn’s chief of staff, Annie Donaldson, and not Mr. McGahn himself about it. Either way, when Mr. Swalwell expressed incredulity that his views of the Mueller investigation would not have come up during such an interview, Mr. Whitaker insisted that Ms. Donaldson had not asked about them.“They did not want to talk about the investigation because the folks were dealing with that investigation, and that’s why they wanted to bring in someone that had been unrelated to the investigation and the campaign,” Mr. Whitaker said, adding: “We did not discuss it. We discussed about my background as a U.S. attorney and my legal practice.”But at the end of the hearing, Mr. Nadler called Mr. Whitaker’s testimony on the topic of communications with the White House before joining the Justice Department inconsistent at best. And Mr. Nadler reiterated his intention to call Mr. Whitaker back for another interview, “under subpoena if necessary,” to answer additional questions he had declined to address on Friday.“It is not credible that you both interviewed for a job handling the president’s response to the special counsel investigation and never conveyed your opinions about that investigation to the White House,” Mr. Nadler said. “We require answers to these questions.” Follow Charlie Savage, Nicholas Fandos and Katie Benner on Twitter: @charlie_savage, @npfandos and @ktbenner.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Acting Attorney General Says He Has Not Interfered in Mueller Inquiry. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageMatthew Whitaker Hearing Updates: He Declines to Defend the Russia InquiryFeb. 8, 2019ImageAfter Heated Exchange, Matthew Whitaker Says He Will Testify Friday Before the HouseFeb. 7, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsIn Closed Hearing, a Clue About ‘the Heart’ of Mueller’s Russia Inquiry - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|In Closed Hearing, a Clue About ‘the Heart’ of Mueller’s Russia InquiryAdvertisementSupported byIn Closed Hearing, a Clue About ‘the Heart’ of Mueller’s Russia InquiryImagePaul Manafort, the Trump campaign chairman at the time, preparing for an interview ahead of the Republican National Convention in July 2016.CreditCreditSam Hodgson for The New York TimesBy Sharon LaFraniere, Kenneth P. Vogel and Scott ShaneFeb. 10, 2019WASHINGTON — Of the few hints to emerge from the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, about evidence of possible collusion between President Trump’s campaign and Russia, one of the most tantalizing surfaced almost in passing in a Washington courtroom last week.Comments by one of Mr. Mueller’s lead prosecutors, disclosed in a transcript of a closed-door hearing, suggest that the special counsel continues to pursue at least one theory: that starting while Russia was taking steps to bolster Mr. Trump’s candidacy, people in his orbit were discussing deals to end a dispute over Russia’s incursions into Ukraine and possibly give Moscow relief from economic sanctions imposed by the United States and its allies.The theory was offered almost as an aside by the prosecutor, Andrew Weissmann, during a discussion of contacts between Mr. Trump’s former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, and a longtime Russian associate, Konstantin V. Kilimnik, whom investigators have linked to Russian intelligence.A closer look at the transcript, released late Thursday, shows that the prosecutors have been keenly focused on discussions the two men had about a plan to end the conflict that followed Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea in 2014. Persuading the United States to ease or end the American-led sanctions imposed to punish Moscow for its aggression has been a primary goal of Russian foreign policy.ImageRussian soldiers guarding a Ukrainian military base in Crimea in March 2014, the year Russia annexed the territory.CreditSergey Ponomarev for The New York TimesAccording to the transcript, which was heavily redacted, Mr. Manafort and Mr. Kilimnik repeatedly communicated about a so-called peace plan for Ukraine starting in early August 2016, while Mr. Manafort was still running Mr. Trump’s campaign, and continuing into 2018, months after Mr. Manafort had been charged by the special counsel’s office with a litany of crimes related to his work in the country. The prosecutors claim that Mr. Manafort misled them about those talks and other interactions with Mr. Kilimnik.Pressed by the judge at Monday’s hearing to say why Mr. Manafort’s alleged lies mattered, Mr. Weissmann gave a broad hint about the thrust of the investigation.“This goes to the larger view of what we think is going on, and what we think is the motive here,” Mr. Weissmann said. “This goes, I think, very much to the heart of what the special counsel’s office is investigating.”Mr. Weissmann did not elaborate. The hearing’s purpose was narrow — determining whether Mr. Manafort had breached his plea agreement by misleading the prosecutors about Mr. Kilimnik and other matters. Mr. Kilimnik was charged last June with conspiring with Mr. Manafort to obstruct justice by trying to shape the accounts of prospective witnesses in Mr. Manafort’s case.Yet Mr. Weissmann’s cryptic comments suggest that the special counsel’s investigation — which Mr. Trump has sought to dismiss as a witch hunt and which the acting attorney general, Matthew G. Whitaker, has said will wrap up soon — is still pursuing the central question of whether there was some kind of deal between Russia and the Trump campaign.Everyone Who’s Been Charged in Investigations Related to the 2016 ElectionSix Trump advisers or officials have been charged by the special counsel.To date, prosecutions by the special counsel have skirted that question. They have laid out Russia’s hacking, leaking and social media manipulation, most of it in favor of Mr. Trump. They have charged multiple Trump aides with lying, including the president’s first national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, who admitted misleading the F.B.I. about his discussions with the Russian ambassador about sanctions.Mr. Trump’s longtime friend Roger J. Stone Jr. was indicted last month on charges of lying to Congress about his efforts to contact WikiLeaks, which released tens of thousands of Democratic emails stolen by the Russians.But the essential question of why the Kremlin bet so heavily on Mr. Trump, and whether President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia had any indication that Mr. Trump would give him what he desired, has remained unresolved.Senator Richard M. Burr of North Carolina, a Republican who is the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, told CBS News on Thursday that, based on the evidence they have seen so far, the committee’s investigators “don’t have anything that would suggest there was collusion by the Trump campaign and Russia.”But Mr. Weissmann’s remarks seem to suggest that for the special counsel, at least, that avenue of inquiry is still alive.ImageMichael T. Flynn, left, President Trump’s first national security adviser, with Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s longtime fixer, in 2016.CreditSam Hodgson for The New York TimesThe sanctions have inflicted substantial pain on the Russian economy. As a candidate and a new president, Mr. Trump seemed skeptical that such punishment was necessary or effective.“Trump’s unusual sympathy and receptivity to Putin and the Kremlin was evident throughout the campaign” and the first few months of his presidency, said John E. Herbst, a former United States ambassador to Ukraine. That pattern, he said, fueled the notion that Mr. Trump might seek a “grand bargain” that would end sanctions, possibly on terms deeply unfavorable to Ukraine.The sanctions also limited business opportunities with Russia. Mr. Trump had long sought a marquee Trump Tower project in Moscow, and at least two aides were pursuing separate nuclear power projects that would have benefited from an end to the sanctions.As Mr. Trump took office, some State Department officials described worrying inquiries that suggested the White House might be preparing to precipitously drop the sanctions. And various intermediaries floated proposals they said would end the sporadic combat in eastern Ukraine between Russian-funded separatist fighters and Ukrainian forces trying to hold back the loss of more territory.Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s longtime fixer, told The New York Times that he left a sealed envelope containing one such plan on Mr. Flynn’s White House desk.ImageThe building in Kiev, Ukraine, that housed Mr. Manafort’s political consulting and advising business.CreditJoseph Sywenkyj for The New York TimesMr. Kilimnik, meanwhile, was trying to use his extensive ties to Mr. Manafort to advance another. It envisioned the return of Viktor F. Yanukovych, a pro-Russia politician who had risen to the presidency of Ukraine in 2010 with the help of Mr. Manafort, who was paid tens of millions of dollars for his efforts.Mr. Yanukovych was forced from office by a popular uprising in 2014 and fled to Russia. Mr. Kilimnik wanted to resurrect him as a semiautonomous leader in eastern Ukraine, a division of the country fiercely opposed by most Ukrainians.In a February 2017 interview with The Times, Mr. Kilimnik described Mr. Manafort as a possible negotiator for the deal. He said that Mr. Manafort had told him that “there is only one enemy — the chaos.”“If there is a serious project that can bring peace to Ukraine, Manafort will be back,” Mr. Kilimnik said at the time.The first discussion between Mr. Manafort and Mr. Kilimnik cited by the prosecutors took place on Aug. 2, 2016, at the Grand Havana Room in Manhattan, and also included Rick Gates, Mr. Manafort’s deputy on the Trump campaign and during his Ukraine work. Mr. Weissmann noted that Mr. Manafort and Mr. Gates tried to avoid drawing attention at that meeting, leaving separately from Mr. Kilimnik.ImageBanners in Red Square in Moscow in March 2014 with President Vladimir V. Putin’s portrait and the slogan “We Are Together,” referring to Russia and Crimea.CreditJames Hill for The New York Times“That meeting and what happened at that meeting is of significance to the special counsel,” Mr. Weissmann said at the hearing.Mr. Manafort initially told prosecutors he had dismissed Mr. Kilimnik’s proposal out of hand, Mr. Weissmann said. In fact, according to the transcript, Mr. Manafort and Mr. Kilimnik talked about the proposal again in December 2016; in January 2017, when Mr. Kilimnik was in Washington for Mr. Trump’s inauguration; and again in Madrid the next month.Mr. Weissmann noted that those talks went forward despite the “enormous amount of attention” in the United States at the time to contacts between Russians and Trump associates.Mr. Manafort’s lawyer, Richard Westling, suggested the discussions were not all that memorable to Mr. Manafort because he had minimal interest in advancing Mr. Kilimnik’s plan. Although the two men revisited the proposal after Mr. Trump’s election, he said, “there is no real follow through.”Mr. Westling said it was not the only such plan afloat — nor was it the only one proposed by Mr. Kilimnik, who has denied having ties to Russian intelligence. Kevin Downing, another lawyer for Mr. Manafort, argued that suspicions about Mr. Kilimnik’s communications were “nonsense” because “the sanctions were going to continue against Russia” whether or not Mr. Trump was elected.VideoPresident Trump’s former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, has now been accused by the special counsel of violating his plea deal by repeatedly lying to federal prosecutors. But this wasn’t Mr. Manafort’s first scandal.CreditCreditDrew Angerer/Getty ImagesWhat Mr. Manafort and Mr. Kilimnik discussed about the Russia-Ukraine conflict is not all that concerned prosecutors. Another issue is a directive from Mr. Manafort to Mr. Gates to turn over Trump campaign polling data to Mr. Kilimnik in the midst of the presidential race.The transcript suggests that Mr. Manafort claims that he wanted only public data transferred. But Mr. Weissmann told the judge that the question of whether any American, wittingly or unwittingly, engaged with Russians who were interfering in the election relates to “the core” of the special counsel’s inquiry.Mr. Manafort’s allies argue that prosecutors have not proved that Mr. Kilimnik was linked to Russian intelligence, and have suggested that he interacted with the United States Embassy in Kiev. They noted that he traveled freely to the United States and had communications with the State Department.But Judge Amy Berman Jackson seemed to agree with prosecutors that whether Mr. Manafort lied about his contacts with Mr. Kilimnik was important, saying at one point, “I am, actually, particularly concerned about this particular alleged false statement.”During the hearing, prosecutors suggested that Mr. Manafort was to be a spokesman in the United States, apparently for Mr. Kilimnik’s plan to divide Ukraine.“If he were the spokesperson, and denominated as such within the United States,” Mr. Weissmann said, “he would also have access to senior people.” He then broke off, saying, “That’s as far as I can go.”Follow Sharon LaFraniere, Kenneth P. Vogel and Scott Shane on Twitter: @SharonLNYT, @KenVogel and @ScottShaneNYT.Andrew Kramer and Julia Mendel contributed reporting from Kiev, Ukraine. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Cryptic Hint, Mueller’s Team Tips Its Hand. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageFirms Recruited by Paul Manafort Are Investigated Over Foreign PaymentsFeb. 5, 2019ImageProsecutors Examining Ukrainians Who Flocked to Trump InauguralJan. 10, 2019ImageProsecutors Told Judge That Manafort Might Have Lied in Hopes of a PardonFeb. 7, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsFewer Officers, More Calls: U.K. Police Are Stretched by Austerity - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexEuropeSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperEurope|Fewer Officers, More Calls: U.K. Police Are Stretched by AusterityAdvertisementSupported byBritain’s Big SqueezeFewer Officers, More Calls: U.K. Police Are Stretched by AusterityBy Benjamin MuellerFeb. 1, 2019ImageInvestigating a burglary at a supermarket in Birmingham, England, in November. Crime is rising, but Conservative-led austerity measures have led to cutbacks in police services.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesBIRMINGHAM, England — On a foggy afternoon last fall, a suicidal patient walked out of Solihull Hospital and disappeared. Alerted by hospital staff, police officers discovered her on a Birmingham street, having downed a bottle of vodka.They took her to their station house, waited for her to sober up and called social service agencies and charities for help. Their calls were rebuffed or never answered.At midnight, Constable Richard Chant finally persuaded the woman to go to a different hospital, but it was a Pyrrhic victory. In the eight hours that officers worked on her case, the West Midlands Police Department received 1,452 other emergency calls, and in many of those cases, hours or days went by before an officer responded.“It was a bit of checkmate,” Constable Chant said. “We need to support these people in crisis, but the police are not the right ones to be dealing with them.”Constable Chant’s burden reflects the strained state of policing in Britain’s era of economic austerity: The number and range of emergency calls has risen sharply in Birmingham and in many other cities, but there are now far fewer officers to respond. The economic uncertainties around Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union mean that budget pressures could be far from over.The West Midlands Police has seen $220 million in budget cuts since the Conservative-led government’s austerity program began in 2010. The department has slashed a quarter of its officers, leaving numbers nearly as low as when the force was formed in 1974. Across England and Wales, police staffing has fallen by about 20,000 officers.The problem is compounded by parallel cuts to social services. Addiction services, housing benefits, gang mediation programs and social services for both adults and children have all been pared back, creating metastasizing problems that often fall to the police.There are also questions about whether the cuts are contributing to a spike in violent crime. Murders and robberies, while not near American crime rates, have surged to their highest levels in a decade in England and Wales. Knife offenses rose in 2018 for the fourth straight year, and crimes involving firearms dipped after rising for several years.ImageInspector Lucy Bird, right, at the scene of a stabbing in Birmingham in November.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesImageThe Digbeth Police Station in Birmingham is now closed to the public under austerity measures.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesImageThe cuts have also put pressure on operators who handle emergency calls.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesSince the mid-1990s, Britain has registered a marked decline in violent crime, national crime surveys show, and it is too soon to know if the recent uptick is an anomaly or a trend. But much of the recent debate has focused nonetheless on the impact of austerity — particularly on how crime calls are going unanswered as officers work to plug holes in the country’s safety net.“If you’re putting your faith in the police to sort out these problems, you’re really firing a sort of pea shooter at something that’s a cannon-sized problem,” said Richard Garside, the director of the Center for Crime and Justice Studies in London.Hours devoted to health and welfare calls leave less time to collect evidence and solve crimes. As a result, victims who are not in immediate danger routinely wait days for a police interview. Officers say they have essentially given up investigating property crimes, dropping burglary complaints unless the homeowners can find a fingerprint or provide surveillance video.Police spending ballooned in the early 2000s under a Labour government, which gave officers a broad charge to clamp down on small-scale misbehavior and impose order in accordance with the “broken windows” theory of policing that was then much in vogue. No longer.“It was all right, the police being the jack-of-all-trades, when there was a necessary amount of funding for the police,” Constable Chant said. “But if you’ve got 20,000 less police officers, less funding, then somebody needs to make the decision about what they want us to do.”A Tattered Safety NetTwo hours north of London by train, the West Midlands contains former factory towns and cities that were once the industrial heart of England. It is now among the poorest regions in Britain.Last summer, as the West Midlands Police confronted a backlog of more than 2,000 unanswered complaints, the department’s leader, Chief Constable Dave Thompson, went on patrol. One woman had filed a complaint about her brother slashing her tires but was more worried about his mental health than the vandalism.“They’d tried the doctor and got nothing; they’d tried a community mental health team and they got nothing,” Chief Constable Thompson said. “I can’t solve this for them, but increasingly, we see calls coming through to the police like that because we’re here 24 hours a day.”ImageA man being taken into custody after being arrested by a police bicycle team in November.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesImageThe West Midlands, which includes Birmingham, was once Britain’s industrial heart. It is now one of the poorest regions in the country.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesImageSocial services have also been pared back under austerity, creating metastasizing problems that often fall to the police.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesOn a different afternoon, Inspector Lucy Bird fielded emergency calls in the West Midlands Police dispatch room, her radio crackling with what she called “mispers,” police slang for reports of missing people, many of them mentally ill.One call involved a mentally ill woman who had stolen lighter fluid and was threatening to burn down a grocery store and set herself on fire. Another call about a man who had gone missing before getting his psychiatric medication set off an intense police search.“A good proportion of our jobs on a daily basis are mental health,” Inspector Bird said.In recent decades, the rate of diagnoses of severe mental illness has climbed in England while services have been reduced. In turn, officers in England and Wales detained 60 percent more people for psychiatric reasons in 2015-16 than they did a decade earlier. The police in London now receive a call related to mental illness about once every four minutes.Prime Minister Theresa May has said that health care has been protected from austerity cuts. But mental health trusts were given $134 million less to spend on patient care in 2017, accounting for inflation, compared with five years earlier, the Royal College of Psychiatrists reported. And last year, the Care Quality Commission, a health care regulator, concluded that more than a third of mental health trusts in England were rated as needing to improve patient safety.Since the 1980s, tens of thousands of psychiatric beds have been cut, initially as part of a policy shift to caring for the mentally ill in the community rather than in hospitals. Under austerity, those reductions have continued.In November, a government inspector found that “other organizations rely on the police to effectively ‘pick up the pieces’ after they have gone off duty.” Even small cuts in social services can mean heavier workloads for police officers.Michael Brown, an inspector in the West Midlands force, is now assigned to study mental health for the national College of Policing. The mental health crisis team in his old patrol area once had two nurses who responded to calls from people who said they were unwell.By 2014, Inspector Brown said, the team had been halved, and government policy prohibited the nurse who remained from making calls alone for safety reasons.Many of those calls were rerouted to the police.ImageThe site of a break-in attempt in Birmingham. Robberies or assaults in which the offender has left are supposed to get attention within an hour, but frequently wait days, one officer said.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesAn Increase in HomicidesInside a police station that closed to the public three years ago, Inspector Warren Hines, a homicide detective, was confronted with a resource crisis. There were more than 50 homicides last year in the West Midlands, roughly twice as many as in 2014, yet he has fewer investigators than ever. Robberies or assaults are supposed to get attention within an hour if the offender has left, yet they can go unanswered for days.On the streets, officers are racing between emergency calls and have less time to patrol a beat. Regular patrols may do little to deter crime, but Inspector Hines said they often provided intelligence essential to his investigations. Officers who used to wait in hot spots for drug dealing or violence now spend more time answering calls.“There was a time when we’d have a pretty good idea of who would be dealing drugs, we’d have a pretty good idea where a lot of the stolen property was being disposed of,” said Inspector Hines, who is also a representative of West Midlands Police Federation, which advocates for officers. “And now we just don’t know.”ImageOfficers talked to a family after an attempted break-in at their home.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesImageAcross England and Wales, police staffing has fallen by 21,000 officers. Officer numbers in the West Midlands are at the lowest levels since 1974.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesImageInspector Warren Hines, who leads one of three homicide teams, is trying to close a growing number of cases with fewer investigators than ever.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesAt the end of May, Inspector Hines was canvassing for witnesses to the killing of a 15-year-old boy. He came upon a taxi driver who, if not likely to be a crucial witness, still could have helped describe the scene. But the man declined to help, saying the police had failed to help him after he reported three robberies.“He said, ‘I don’t really see it’s my job to help you,’” Inspector Hines said.Part of what has slowed response times has been the closing of local police stations and the consolidation of response teams that began in the early years of austerity. Only 10 stations in the West Midlands now have a public counter, down from 48 in 2010, and 14 local stations have been shut completely.Sgt. Richard Cooke, the chairman of the West Midlands Police Federation, remembered an assault case in Walsall, an industrial town northwest of Birmingham. A woman called the emergency number to say that her son, who had a history of drug abuse, was trying to kick in her door.The nearest officers were in Wolverhampton, about 10 miles away. By the time they arrived, the woman had been attacked and her son had fled.“That’s happening on a regular basis,” Sergeant Cooke said.‘Their Gang Is Bigger Than Our Gang’For many police departments, as well as for Britain’s still influential tabloids, the answer to the deteriorating service seems simple: more officers. Patterns of taxi robberies and home break-ins are being missed because so many cases are shelved without so much as a cursory investigation, they say. Victims stop calling the police. Criminals are emboldened.“When the criminals realize that their gang is bigger than our gang,” Constable Chant said, “they start exploiting that.”Much of the blame has fallen on Mrs. May, the architect of the cuts as home secretary from 2010 to 2016. Even as she negotiates Britain’s tortured withdrawal from the European Union, she faces the daily ire of officers who have not forgiven her for past crackdowns on corruption in officer associations and on stop-and-frisk tactics, or for the personnel cutbacks.“We think she’s got it in for us,” Sergeant Cooke said.But others say Britain should restore funding for social services rather than expand police forces that are poorly equipped to address a mental health crisis.ImageInspector Bird responding to an emergency call. “A good proportion of our jobs on a daily basis are mental health,” she said.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesImageKirk Dawes ran a program to deal with gang violence that was discontinued after government cuts.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesImageA police station in Birmingham.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesIn mid-December, Mrs. May’s government announced an additional $1.2 billion for the police. Police leaders were quick to lament that much of it would be absorbed by the forces’ growing pension obligations, rather than adding more officers.Kirk Dawes, a former West Midlands police officer, retired from the force and started a mediation program for Birmingham, the site of vicious feuds between gangs like the Burger Bar Boys and Johnson Crew.Having studied gang mediation tactics in New Jersey and in Northern Ireland, he took referrals from the police when someone was attacked or when investigators caught wind of a threat to someone’s life.With roughly 100 cases a year in the early 2000s, the mediation team had only one person killed on its watch. The team had an annual budget of roughly $440,000, and Mr. Dawes figures it saved the government millions of dollars in costly homicide investigations. But under austerity, the program’s budget was sharply reduced, until it folded in 2012.By last fall, more than a third of the homicides being investigated by West Midlands detectives were the sort of killings that Mr. Dawes’s team might once have worked to prevent.“All of that was lost,” he said.ImageThe British government has announced additional funding for the police forces, but public health budgets are expected to keep shrinking through 2021.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesA version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: An Overwhelmed Blue Line: Policing in an Age of Austerity. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageEngland’s Mental Health Experiment: No-Cost Talk TherapyJuly 24, 2017ImageRising Knife Violence Alarms Britain as Youths Take Up BladesMay 3, 2017ImageU.K. Police Look to Young Recruits to Help Shed an Image as ‘Male, Pale and Stale’Jan. 16, 2017ImageCrime in England and Wales Is Rising at Fastest Rate in a DecadeJuly 20, 2017ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsShamima Begum, British Woman Who Joined ISIS in Syria, Wants to Come Home - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexEuropeSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperEurope|Shamima Begum, British Woman Who Joined ISIS in Syria, Wants to Come HomeAdvertisementSupported byShamima Begum, British Woman Who Joined ISIS in Syria, Wants to Come HomeBy Benjamin MuellerFeb. 14, 2019ImageShamima Begum passing through security barriers at Gatwick Airport, south of London, in 2015. She flew to Turkey, then boarded a bus to the Syrian border.CreditCreditMetropolitan Police, via Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesLONDON — A 19-year-old woman who left Britain in 2015 to join the Islamic State and who says she is nine months pregnant has told a reporter that she fled the last remaining village held by the terrorist group in Syria and wanted to return home.But the woman, Shamima Begum, faces an uncertain future, with no clear answers about how she would get home to east London, or about whether Britain would try to prosecute her for terrorist offenses if she did.Speaking to a reporter for The Times of London in Al Hawl refugee camp in northeastern Syria, Ms. Begum said she had left the village of Baghuz, the last speck of land under Islamic State control in Iraq and Syria, as Kurdish-led forces allied with the United States closed in. Her Dutch husband, an Islamic State fighter whom she married soon after arriving in Raqqa, Syria, surrendered to Syrian fighters allied to the Kurdish-led forces.Ms. Begum said that she had lost two children — an 8-month-old son and a daughter who was nearly 2 — to illness and malnutrition in recent months, and that she feared for her unborn child.“I was weak,” she said. “I could not endure the suffering and hardship that staying on the battlefield involved. But I was also frightened that the child I am about to give birth to would die like my other children if I stayed on. So I fled the caliphate. Now all I want to do is come home to Britain.”But Ms. Begum said she did not regret traveling to Syria.“When I saw my first severed head in a bin it didn’t faze me at all,” she told The Times of London. “It was from a captured fighter seized on the battlefield, an enemy of Islam. I thought only of what he would have done to a Muslim woman if he had the chance.”Ms. Begum drew headlines in 2015 when she and two classmates from Bethnal Green in east London flew to Turkey from Gatwick Airport and then boarded a bus to the Syrian border. Known as the Bethnal Green girls, they became the face of young women attracted to what experts described as a jihadist girl-power subculture.Barred from combat, the young women supported the group’s state-building efforts as wives, mothers, recruiters and sometimes online cheerleaders for violence.British police officials said in 2015 that the women would be allowed to return home without facing charges because there was no evidence they had committed terrorism offenses, and a lawyer who represented Ms. Begum’s family urged the authorities this week to honor that promise.But Ben Wallace, Britain’s security minister, said on Thursday that British officials would not help rescue Ms. Begum because it was too dangerous to provide consular services in Syria. And he warned that anyone who had traveled to support terrorism against the British government’s advice would, upon returning, be “questioned, investigated and potentially prosecuted for committing terrorist offenses.”Thousands of people have been streaming out of the Islamic State’s fast-shrinking territory in recent weeks. The group once ruled an area the size of Britain, but that is now all but gone.“The caliphate is over,” Ms. Begum said. “There was so much oppression and corruption that I don’t think they deserved victory.”She said she had read what people in Britain thought of her, but was intent on returning home.“I’ll do anything required just to be able to come home and live quietly with my child,” she said.Follow Benjamin Mueller on Twitter: @benjmueller. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A6 of the New York edition with the headline: British Woman Who Joined ISIS in Syria Seeks Return Home. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageA Desperate Exodus From ISIS’ Final VillageFeb. 6, 2019ImageJihad and Girl Power: How ISIS Lured 3 London GirlsAug. 17, 2015ImageTeenage Girl Leaves for ISIS, and Others FollowFeb. 24, 2015AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsHow a ‘No-Deal’ Brexit Could Open a Path to Irish Unity - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexEuropeSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperEurope|How a ‘No-Deal’ Brexit Could Open a Path to Irish UnityAdvertisementSupported byHow a ‘No-Deal’ Brexit Could Open a Path to Irish UnityImageThe corner of Londonderry, Northern Ireland, where the “Bloody Sunday” killings of demonstrators were carried out. The Good Friday Agreement of 1998 has largely ended sectarian violence.CreditCreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesBy Benjamin MuellerFeb. 15, 2019LONDONDERRY, Northern Ireland — Gary Donnelly, a city councilor in Londonderry, has fought for years to end British rule in Northern Ireland. After the 1998 peace agreement many of his allies put aside the struggle to expel the British and reunify with the Irish Republic, but not Mr. Donnelly.Now, in the unremitting gloom that has been Northern Ireland’s lot in recent years, he has sighted a beacon of hope in Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union, or Brexit. As the possibility grows of Britain’s crashing out with no deal, so, too, does the likelihood of the reimposition of a hard border with the Irish Republic that many people see as a dire threat to peace and stability.But Mr. Donnelly has a different take. While he shares a sense of alarm about a hard border, he also thinks talk of its return has brought much-needed clarity to the Irish question.“Brexit has highlighted the absurdity of partition,” Mr. Donnelly said. “Others had always been brushing it under the carpet.”Mr. Donnelly’s views may be more extreme than most, and the chances of a referendum on reunification remain distant, for now. But the increasing possibility that Britain will leave the European Union on March 29 without an agreement has rallied both moderates and extremists in the united-Ireland camp behind renewed talk of a single Irish state.ImageThe 300-mile border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic has been rendered virtually invisible by shared trading rules in the European Union. But a no-deal Brexit could bring back checkpoints.CreditAndrew Testa for The New York Times“The sense of a slow momentum toward Irish reunification has become a fast momentum now,” said Paul Gosling, a Londonderry-based English economist who recently published a book outlining a 10-year plan to reunify Ireland.And lurking in the background of the debate is the possibility that the imposition of a hard border between north and south, with physical checkpoints, could reignite the violence that largely ended in 1998 — fears that were underscored by a recent car bombing in Londonderry and several hoaxes.Given the choice between that and reunification, people across the island of Ireland have shown a
preference for unity, though neither government has expressed the same enthusiasm.Not helping matters, the regional assembly for Northern Ireland, based in Stormont, has been suspended for two years because of political feuds and scandals. And Northern Ireland’s fragile balance of power between Irish nationalists and pro-United Kingdom unionists has been upset, if not altogether destroyed, by the agreement of the conservative Democratic Unionist Party to prop up Prime Minister Theresa May’s minority government in London.That has turned the Democratic Unionists into Northern Ireland’s dominant force in Westminster, despite the party’s bucking most residents’ wishes by championing Brexit. (The pro-Irish unity party, Sinn Fein, refuses to send elected leaders to Parliament at all.)The combination of a hard border and political deadlock could weaken the peace agreement and possibly lead to a renewal of the violence that took more than 3,500 lives during the Troubles, analysts say. That, in turn, might heighten pressures for reunification.ImageForensic officers inspecting the remains of a van after a bombing attack outside a courthouse in Londonderry last month. The attack revived deep fears of political violence.
CreditCharles Mcquillan/Getty ImagesDeirdre Heenan, a professor of social policy at Ulster University in Londonderry, said that the effect of a suspended regional assembly and out-of-touch leadership was a “political vacuum” in Northern Ireland. “And history will tell you that political vacuums give rise to extreme voices,” she said.The dangers were on display in January, when a car bomb exploded in front of a courthouse in Londonderry. The police suspected a splinter group called the New Irish Republican Army. No one was injured, but dozens of people were forced out of their homes after the explosion and a series of car hijackings that followed.Such paramilitary-style attacks, commonplace during the Troubles but rare since 1998, have struck occasionally in recent years, and the threat of Brexit makes them all the more menacing.Liz McGrory, 69, who was forced out of her home for 10 hours last month after a car was hijacked and abandoned nearby, said, “That’s the first time I’ve experienced anything since the Troubles were over.”She added, “The last so many years, we were able to come and go as we wanted. Now, you have this dread on you.”Londonderry, the site of bitter fighting between warring paramilitary groups and British soldiers during the Troubles, has become relatively harmonious since 1998. Protestants and Catholics mix as neighbors and, occasionally, spouses. The city’s name, once emblematic of the strife, no longer provokes angry reactions. (Protestants preferred Londonderry, the official name, and Catholics favored Derry, as it is more widely known.)ImageAn anti-Brexit protest in Louth, Ireland, last month.CreditCharles McQuillan/Getty ImagesBut the idea of Northern Ireland breaking from the United Kingdom in order to stay in the European Union is spurring fresh debates across the city. Taxi drivers joke that they will soon be taking payments in euros. Pro-Irish unity campaigners are discussing how to persuade opponents of the virtues of an all-island Irish state.Opponents of reunification once saw the Irish Republic’s struggling economy and conservative social values as reasons to stay in the United Kingdom. But the republic has since legalized same-sex marriage and abortion, bringing its laws closer to the views of most people in the north, even if both remain outlawed there. While both are economically vulnerable to Brexit, the republic has grown strongly in recent years while the North has faltered.A significant demographic shift also looms. Protestants held a narrow edge on Catholics in population when the last census was taken, in 2011. But Protestants dominate among the oldest age group, while younger people are more likely to be Catholic, heralding what experts say will soon be a Catholic majority.Still, the path to reunification is not at all clear. For that to happen, a majority of voters in Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic would need to back a public referendum called a border poll — and the British government has discretion over when to call a vote. Many pro-United Kingdom loyalists remain vehemently opposed to Irish unity, and even some pro-Irish unity moderates are not ready to give up the benefits of being in Britain.The most optimistic republicans see a border poll happening within a decade. Yet, this week, Mary Lou McDonald, the leader of the main republican party, Sinn Fein, said that in the event of a no-deal Brexit, “there will be an absolute imperative, a democratic imperative, to put the issue of Irish unity to the people by way of a referendum.”Nonetheless, some analysts have started reckoning with the constitutional dilemmas posed by a united Ireland. Of those, none is more important than how to protect the rights of what would be a minority of pro-United Kingdom loyalists who see themselves as British, not Irish, said Mary Murphy, who studies Northern Ireland politics at University College Cork.ImageA view of Londonderry. “Brexit changes everything,” said Paul Gosling, an English economist based in the city. “The sense of a slow momentum toward Irish reunification has become a fast momentum now.”CreditAndrew Testa for The New York TimesColin Harvey, a law professor at Queen’s University Belfast who is drafting a paper about the legal questions around reunification, said the issue had “gone from the margins to the mainstream very, very rapidly as a result of Brexit.”“Planning and preparation should start now, in some sense so as not to replicate the Brexit mess,” he added, referring to the false promises and voter confusion surrounding Britain’s withdrawal from the bloc.But pro-British unionists have dug in. Despite the Democratic Unionist Party’s campaigning for Brexit, many other unionists are trying to save their place in the United Kingdom by making their movement more inclusive.They are rejecting party orthodoxy by defending gay and abortion rights. And they are pitching nationalists on the pragmatic case for staying in the United Kingdom: Keep your British benefits and free health care, and leave talk of reunification for another day.“Is unionism under more threat? Yeah, it certainly is, and Brexit has created that increased threat,” said Brian Dougherty, a unionist community worker involved with the Londonderry Bands Forum, a group that lobbies on behalf of the local bands that are an integral part of Protestant culture.But, he said, “Talk of a border poll has moved beyond what’s right for the country to being very opportunistic.”Ed O’Loughlin contributed reporting. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: How a ‘No-Deal’ Brexit Could Create Irish Unity. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated Coverage50 Years Later, Troubles Still Cast ‘Huge Shadow’ Over Northern IrelandOct. 4, 2018ImageE.U. Rebuffs May’s New Brexit Demand, but Promises More TalksFeb. 7, 2019ImageWhere Europe Would Be Hurt Most by a No-Deal BrexitFeb. 7, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsTrump’s Syria Withdrawal Order Forces Allies to Weigh Return of ISIS Detainees - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexMiddle EastSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperMiddle East|Trump’s Syria Withdrawal Order Forces Allies to Weigh Return of ISIS DetaineesAdvertisementSupported byTrump’s Syria Withdrawal Order Forces Allies to Weigh Return of ISIS DetaineesImageMen suspected to be linked to the Islamic State were arrested last month by Syrian Democratic Forces in southeastern Syria.CreditCreditIvor Prickett for The New York TimesBy Charlie Savage and Eric SchmittFeb. 14, 2019WASHINGTON — President Trump’s abrupt decision to withdraw American troops from northern Syria provoked widespread fears over a future resurgence of the Islamic State. But it may yet have a silver lining: Other countries have signaled they are willing to take back their citizens who joined the terrorist group but are now detained in makeshift camps.About 850 men and several thousand women and children from nearly 50 countries are being held in northern Syria in detention camps for Islamic State fighters and sympathizers. They have been locked up indefinitely, in ad hoc wartime prisons and refugee camps, by the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, which is allied with the United States.[A British woman who joined the Islamic State in Syria wants to come home.]Most of those detainees’ home countries have been looking the other way, despite the Kurds’ pleas to relieve them of that burden. But Mr. Trump’s sudden announcement on Dec. 19 that he intended to withdraw American troops soon has since called into doubt the Kurds’ ability to maintain control of the prisons and camps.That, in turn, has led to concerns that the foreign fighters could escape or be freed and return home to launch attacks — and to a new burst of activity to repatriate some of them.“Since the Syria withdrawal announcement was made in December, we have detected a new sense of urgency among our partner nations,” said Nathan A. Sales, the State Department’s top counterterrorism official.There is no indication that Mr. Trump was thinking about how to manage the detainees when he announced the Syria withdrawal. But forcing allies to consider repatriating their detained citizens may be the latest of a handful of examples in which the president’s disruptive approach has managed to shake loose results.Since taking office, Mr. Trump has repeatedly undermined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in appearing to link commitments of American military support to member states that lived up to obligations on domestic military spending. His suggestion infuriated allies. But several countries have since increased their military spending, accelerating a previously tepid upward trend.And in the summer of 2017, Mr. Trump’s bellicose talk of raining “fire and fury” upon North Korea may have prompted the North’s leader, Kim Jong-un, to pause his nuclear and missile tests and begin negotiations to eliminate his nuclear arsenal. The long-term results of those negotiations, however, remain unclear.Daniel Fried, a former senior State Department official who retired in 2017 and is now a fellow at the Atlantic Council, said that Mr. Trump’s disruptive approach sometimes appeared meant to produce favorable results. At other times, he said, it seemed pointless — as when allies were denigrated.But in solving the problem of Islamic State detainees, Mr. Fried said, the president’s abrupt order to leave Syria may prove helpful.“Unintentionally, it may be that Trump’s disruptive style has had a positive impact in forcing countries to face problems that they would rather kick down the road,” Mr. Fried said.The prospect of repatriating citizens who had joined the Islamic State, and of trying to prosecute or reintegrate them into society, has raised daunting concerns for many allied governments over security, legal and political risks. Not one detainee from the makeshift Syrian camps was returned to their home nation in the last five months of 2018.But in January, Kazakhstan announced that it had repatriated about 46 of the detainees, including about 41 women and children. Four American officials said Oman and Tunisia also took back some of their citizens from the Kurds.A Tunisian official denied that his government had agreed to repatriate any Islamic State fighters or their families. But several other officials said up to nine people among what was described as a large number of Tunisian detainees have so far been returned.At a news conference last week in Washington, Adel al-Jubeir, a senior Saudi official, said his government was willing to repatriate some 50 Saudi men held in the Kurdish camps.Several European countries that had previously refused to deal with their detained citizens are now considering repatriating some of them, including Kosovo.“We are encouraged that partner nations see the value in taking responsibility for the appropriate disposition of their citizens who chose to travel to Syria and fight ISIS,” said Garrett Marquis, a spokesman for the White House’s National Security Council, who declined to address specific countries.Additionally, reports last month indicated that France is close to deciding whether to bring back about 130 of its detained citizens, including men, women and children. Other European countries with large numbers of detained citizens, including Germany and Belgium, are said to be closely watching how Paris will decide, with an eye toward echoing it.In a statement to The New York Times, France’s Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs made clear that the withdrawal of American forces from Syria had forced it to deal with the detainees.“In light of developments in the military situation in northeastern Syria and American decisions, and in order to ensure the security of French people, we are exploring all options in order to prevent these potentially dangerous individuals from escaping or dispersing,” the statement said.Christopher P. Costa, a former National Security Council senior director for counterterrorism in the Trump administration, said the new willingness by nations is a positive sign for a dilemma that has few good answers.“States don’t always think that this president is predictable in many ways, so if we can enjoy countries taking on ownership of detainees, that is a good outcome of accelerating withdrawal of U.S. forces,” said Mr. Costa, now the head of the International Spy Museum in Washington.Countries have different reasons for their reluctance to take back Islamic State detainees.Most are rooted in security concerns about people who may be difficult to successfully prosecute and imprison with lengthy sentences. Even those who pose little or no security risks may be hard to reintegrate into society because of their ideology or wartime experiences, and children who had been part of ISIS through no fault of their own are likely to be stigmatized.For democracies, there is scant political support for bringing back such a problematic group, although the Belgian government was recently ordered by a court to repatriate two women and six children.In Britain this week, a debate erupted over whether the government should rescue Shaminma Begum, 19, a British woman who ran away to join ISIS three years ago and is now nine months pregnant and in a refugee camp. She told a Times of London reporter that said she wanted to go home but expressed no regrets about traveling to Syria.Countries with fragile governments, like Tunisia, also worry about the ability to absorb a large cohort of returning extremists. Additionally, the prospect of repatriating detainees to states with poor human rights records, such as Egypt or China, has raised humanitarian concerns.The large number of detainees from Yemen poses a different problem, given that the civil war in that country could render assurances for their prosecution or resettlement at least difficult, if not impossible.One American official described preliminary efforts to cajole third countries to resettle some detainees who cannot be returned to their troubled home nations, following a precedent during the Obama administration of resettling many lower-level Guantánamo detainees in foreign states.For now, that remains a long-term goal. But another official, Mr. Sales, described early signs of progress in persuading some countries to reclaim their own citizens for prosecution — or at least to keep them from returning to the battlefield.“That message is resonating now in a way it hasn’t in the past, and I think that is because our partner nations recognize there is a narrowing window of opportunity here,” he said. “As long as the U.S. remains active in northeast Syria, we are better able to influence outcomes. That is why I think you are seeing our partners focus on this with a greater sense of seriousness.”Benjamin Mueller contributed reporting from London. Follow Charlie Savage and Eric Schmitt on Twitter: @charlie_savage and @EricSchmittNYT.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump’s Order to Leave Syria Forces Allies to Weigh Return of ISIS Detainees. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageShamima Begum, British Woman Who Joined ISIS in Syria, Wants to Come HomeFeb. 14, 2019ImageTrump Seeks to Reassure Allies on ISIS Fight as Syria Withdrawal LoomsFeb. 6, 2019ImageA Desperate Exodus From ISIS’ Final VillageFeb. 6, 2019ImageShow AllAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsMatthew Whitaker Hearing Updates: He Declines to Defend the Russia Inquiry - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Matthew Whitaker Hearing Updates: He Declines to Defend the Russia InquiryAdvertisementSupported byMatthew Whitaker Hearing Updates: He Declines to Defend the Russia InquiryThe acting attorney general appeared before the House Judiciary Committee. Democrats asked about the Russia investigation and his oversight of it.By Katie Benner, Nicholas Fandos and Charlie SavageMatthew G. Whitaker declined to defend the special counsel’s investigation, as his predecessor and likely successor at the Justice Department have doneBut Mr. Whitaker declared that he had “not interfered in any way” in the special counsel investigation and that he had provided no information about it to President Trump or White House officials.Mr. Whitaker said multiple times that he did not discuss the Mueller investigation with anyone at the White House, even though in July 2017 he interviewed to become a White House lawyer who would manage and respond to that inquiry.VideoMatthew G. Whitaker, the acting attorney general, said that he had provided no information to President Trump or White House officials about the special counsel’s Russia investigation.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesWhitaker pointedly declines to defend the Mueller investigationMr. Whitaker’s predecessor overseeing the special counsel investigation, Rod J. Rosenstein, and his likely successor, William P. Barr, have both defended Mr. Mueller from the president’s accusation that the inquiry is a “witch hunt.” Mr. Whitaker was asked to do the same, and had a different answer.“Would you say the special counsel’s investigation is a witch hunt?” Representative Steve Cohen, Democrat of Tennessee, asked. “Are you overseeing a witch hunt?”“Congressman, it would be inappropriate for me to talk about an ongoing investigation,” Mr. Whitaker said, but he added that he had not denied it any funds or interfered with Mr. Mueller’s work. He provided a similar answer to another Democrat.Whitaker says he has not interfered in the Russia inquiryThe hearing quickly turned contentious as the committee chairman, Representative Jerrold Nadler, pressed Mr. Whitaker for details about when he had been briefed about the special counsel investigation and the acting attorney general refused to answer. But under pressure from the chairman, Mr. Whitaker made news: He testified that he had not talked to Mr. Trump or senior White House officials about information: “I do not believe that I have briefed third-party individuals outside of the Department of Justice. I’ve received the briefings myself, and I’m usually the endpoint at that information.”Mr. Whitaker ultimately declared that though he had been briefed, he had followed “the special counsel’s regulations to a T.”“There’s been no event, no decision that has required me to take any action, and I’ve not interfered in any way with the special counsel’s investigation,” he said.ImageRepresentative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York Nadler, made clear that President Trump and the Russia investigation will dominate the hearing.CreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesHe interviewed for a job responding to the Mueller inquiry, but also says he never talked to the White House about the inquiryOne moment in Mr. Whitaker’s testimony raised a potential conflict with news reports about events that led up to the Trump administration’s hiring of him.Pressed by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, to say whether he had spoken to Mr. Trump, his family, White House officials, or outside surrogates like Rudy Giuliani about his views of the Mueller investigation before he joined the Justice Department in the fall of 2017, Mr. Whitaker said definitively that he had not.But, as The New York Times has reported, in July 2017 Mr. Whitaker interviewed with Donald F. McGahn II, then serving as Mr. Trump’s White House counsel, about the possibility of becoming the administration’s in-house lawyer who would manage and respond to the Mueller investigation. The White House instead ended up giving that job to Ty Cobb, and Mr. Whitaker continued to make public comments that were skeptical of the Russia investigation before the administration made him chief of staff to Mr. Sessions.Later, under questioning by Representative Eric Swalwell, Democrat of California, Mr. Whitaker acknowledged applying for that job but said he had spoken with Mr. McGahn’s chief of staff, Annie Donaldson, and insisted that his views of the Mueller investigation were not part of the interview.“They did not want to talk about the investigation because the folks were dealing with that investigation and that’s why they wanted to bring in someone that had been unrelated to the investigation and the campaign,” Mr. Whitaker said, adding: “We did not discuss it. We discussed about my background as a U.S. attorney and my legal practice.”Did Trump lash out?CNN last month reported that Mr. Trump yelled at Mr. Whitaker after two developments in the Cohen case rattled the White House: Mr. Cohen’s decision to plead guilty to lying about the Trump organization’s work on a tower project in Moscow and the fact that the president was identified as Individual-1 in the Cohen plea papers.Mr. Whitaker first demurred when asked about the incidents. But when Rhode Island Democrat David Cicilline said, “I’m asking you under oath,” Mr. Whitaker flatly denied them. “No, congressman.”Despite reports that Mr. Trump admonished Mr. Whitaker after those developments, the acting attorney general also said, “I did not talk to the president about the Mueller investigation.”Whitaker distances himself from a payday for one of the G.O.P.’s biggest donorsMr. Whitaker said that he was not involved in the Justice Department’s controversial decision to reimpose restrictions on online gambling. That decision reversed a 2011 opinion allowing several types of gambling online. Representative Jamie Raskin, Democrat of Maryland, noted that the casino magnate Sheldon Adelson, one of the Republican party’s largest donors, spent more than a million dollars unsuccessfully lobbying Congress to override the original Justice Department opinion. When the Justice Department changed that opinion to further restrict online gambling, it greatly benefited Mr. Adelson’s businesses.Mr. Whitaker says he is implementing new criminal justice lawCongress passed a partial overhaul of federal prison and sentencing laws last year in an effort to begin unwinding many of the tough-on-crime policies of the 1980s and 1990s. Mr. Whitaker put distance between his own views and those of his former boss, Jeff Sessions, who fought against the changes in the bill, the First Step Act.Mr. Whitaker said he had begun implementing them at the Justice Department.He asked Congress to continue to allocate the funds necessary to institute the law’s provisions, including new programs meant to reduce recidivism rates. He said the department had issued guidance Thursday night to United States attorneys offices across the country on how to put the changes in place, and that he understood the Bureau of Prisons was making similar changes.“To successfully get that passed in both the House and the Senate, I know how difficult that is,” said Mr. Whitaker, who is close to the bill’s chief author, Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa.ImageMr. Whitaker took notes during the hearing.CreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesDemocrats and Whitaker tangle to score points on a televised stageOversight hearings like the one in the Judiciary Committee are part fact-finding, part political theater. Lawmakers take pains to set up contentious exchanges that can be captured on video and cut into clips for cable news or social media. They raise their voices. They often insinuate a witness is hiding something.Republicans have done it when they were in power, and newly empowered Democrats flashed elements of it on Friday.The trouble for Democrats was, that after Mr. Whitaker declared directly at the hearing’s outset that he had not interfered with Mr. Mueller’s work, they struggled to know where to go next.They repeated questions about his views of the special counsel inquiry and why he had discussed it publicly, with varying twists. Mr. Whitaker basically repeated himself, or said he could not answer.Republicans helped Mr. Whitaker with a two-tone approach. Mr. Collins, the top ranking Republican, vocally and at times voluminously, objected to the germaneness of Democrats’ lines of questioning, trying to make them look unreasonable, while many rank-and-file members used their allotted time to lament all the policy areas — opioids, crime, guns — that Mr. Whitaker ought to be addressing but could not.But Mr. Whitaker hurt his own case, too, by interrupting lawmakers and trying to police their questioning time.Defending his appointment as acting attorney generalDemocrats used their questioning to repeatedly insinuate that Mr. Trump had chosen Mr. Whitaker as acting attorney general because of his openly critical views of the special counsel investigation. Mr. Whitaker repeatedly rejected that premise.“I believe the president chose me to be acting attorney general for a couple of reasons,” Mr. Whitaker said.One was his experience as a United States attorney in Iowa. The other was his close work with Jeff Sessions, the former attorney general he served as his chief of staff.“I think the president was comfortable that to continue the momentum at the Department of Justice we had established in addressing these important priority issues like reducing violent crimes, combating the opioid crisis and others, that the president felt I was best positioned to do the duties of attorney general,” Mr. Whitaker said.Whitaker thinks he’s shared enough about MuellerMr. Whitaker told Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, that he would not discuss his decision to say last month that the Mueller inquiry was drawing to a close, citing the fact that it is an ongoing investigation. “It seems to me you did talk about an ongoing investigation,” Ms. Lofgren said, adding that she would like to know what he meant by his comments.Mr. Whitaker would say only that the special counsel investigation was proceeding consistent with the regulations outlined by Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general.VideoThe acting attorney general, a vocal critic of the special counsel investigation into Russian meddling, was associated with a shadowy company fined nearly $26 million.CreditCreditAllison Shelley/ReutersCameos for Roger Stone and Bruce OhrRepresentative Doug Collins of Georgia, the ranking Republican on the committee, criticized Democrats for obsessing over the special counsel investigation, but he had some questions of his own related to its work.The first related to the arrest of Roger J. Stone Jr., one of Mr. Trump’s longtime advisers, by the F.B.I. last month. CNN captured the raid of Mr. Stone’s Florida home live with a camera it had set up on the street, and Mr. Collins wanted to know if the news channel had been tipped off.Mr. Whitaker said the coincidence was “deeply concerning,” but said he did not know of any tip.“I share your concern with the possibility that a media outlet was tipped off to Mr. Stone’s either indictment or arrest before it was made,” Mr. Whitaker said.CNN has said its positioning was just a matter of good reporting and luck.Mr. Collins also asked whether or not Bruce Ohr, a once obscure Justice Department official, still worked there. Mr. Ohr has long been targeted by the president’s allies for contacts he and his wife, who worked as a contractor for Fusion GPS, had with that research firm, which helped compile a salacious dossier about Mr. Trump.Mr. Ohr is still an employee, Mr. Whitaker said, adding that he could not comment further on a “human resource matter.”Whitaker: “Mr. Chairman, I see that your five minutes is up.”When Mr. Nadler asked Mr. Whitaker if he had ever been asked to approve any request for action to be taken by Mr. Mueller, Mr. Whitaker replied: “Mr. Chairman, I see that your five minutes is up.”The room then broke into laughter as Mr. Nadler looked up in apparent disbelief, then grinned himself and noted that he did not enforce the five-minute rule during Mr. Whitaker’s opening statement, then asked him to “answer the question, please.”The exchange was a remarkable breach of decorum between two branches of government. It is highly unusual for a witness, much less an official serving in an acting capacity, to challenge the chairman of a congressional committee that oversees his department.Mr. Whitaker’s retorts to lawmakers soon irked Democrats. “Mr. Attorney General, we are not joking here,” said Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, Democrat of Texas, during a later exchange. “And your humor is not acceptable.”Whitaker repeatedly tries to shift to other subjects.As lawmakers pressed him again and again toward discussion of the special counsel’s investigation, Mr. Whitaker made clear that he would much prefer to talk about the department, its policies and its work.“I think it’s important as we sit here today that we understand that this is not a confirmation hearing, that I’m probably going to replaced by Bill Barr in the next week,” he said in one exchange, referring to William P. Barr, the president’s attorney general nominee.In unsolicited remarks, Mr. Whitaker said he was “surprised” that they had not talked about violent crime. “We haven’t talked about the opioid crisis,” he continued. “We haven’t talked about religious liberty yet. We haven’t talked about free speech on the college campuses, and whole host of issues that I know are very important to you.”He also defended his own integrity: “I do want to make clear that I am personally committed to the integrity of the Department of Justice. Since becoming acting attorney general, I have run the department to the best of my ability, with fidelity to the law and to the Constitution.”Nadler says Whitaker’s behavior “falls well short of the mark”Mr. Nadler, the committee chairman, opened the hearing with sharp criticisms of Mr. Whitaker’s conduct while the acting attorney general. In particular he took Mr. Whitaker to task for refusing to recuse himself from overseeing the Russia investigation even after career ethics officials recommended that he do so — a decision that Mr. Nadler said fell “well short of the mark.”It’s one of many actions that Mr. Nadler said raised important questions about why President Trump chose Mr. Whitaker to run the department: Why did the president get rid of Mr. Sessions? Why did Mr. Whitaker choose to oversee an investigation that could harm Mr. Trump? And what does Mr. Trump hope to get from Mr. Whitaker’s leadership?Collins accuses Democrats of “political theater” before putting on his own opening showMr. Collins, the ranking Republican on the committee, angrily attacked Democrats in his opening statement, saying that they were interested in carrying out a “character assassination” of Mr. Whitaker and damaging Mr. Trump, not carrying out oversight of the Department of Justice. Mr. Collins noted that Mr. Nadler had promised not to issue a subpoena to Mr. Whitaker on Friday, saying Democrats had played a “hide and seek game” in securing permission on Thursday to subpoena Mr. Whitaker. And, noting that Mr. Barr would probably be attorney general by the end of next week, he said Democrats were just interested in having a “show” for partisan purposes.After accusing Mr. Nadler of wasting time, Mr. Collins ended his fiery opening remarks by calling for the committee to adjourn. Mr. Nadler objected, but the request forced a committee vote to keep the hearing going before Mr. Whitaker was even sworn in.Welcome to the Hill. Now about those documents.Democrats’ antagonizing of Mr. Whitaker began before he was even in the hearing room on Friday. Four Democratic committee chairmen, including Mr. Nadler of the Judiciary Committee, released a letter they sent Mr. Whitaker on Thursday raising new questions about his work for a Florida company, World Patent Marketing, which is accused of defrauding customers. Mr. Whitaker, they said, had ignored their earlier requests for information. And new information obtained by the House indicated that Mr. Whitaker had not returned funds he had been paid by the company, which the chairmen said it had requested be returned to pay victims of the fraud.“To date, you have failed to respond to that letter or provide a single document that we requested,” they wrote. “Since that time, we have obtained new documents showing that you failed to return thousands of dollars that were supposed to be distributed to the victims of World Patent Marketing alleged fraud, despite your involvement with Mr. Cooper in handling complaints from individuals of the company’s actions.”A federal judge shut the company down last year and fined it nearly $26 million.Whitaker won’t share his talks with TrumpMr. Whitaker tried to set the tone for the back and forth with lawmakers by saying in his opening statement that he would not answer questions about his conversations with Mr. Trump.“I will continue the longstanding Executive Branch policy and practice of not disclosing information that may be subject to executive privilege,” he said.That answer did not satisfy the chairman, who said he expected Mr. Whitaker to consult the Justice Department and White House to return “in the coming weeks” for a transcribed deposition.“Any questions that are unanswered today or require consultation with the White House will be asked again at that proceeding, and I expect a clean answer or a proper assertion of privilege,” Mr. Nadler said.[Sign up for Crossing the Border, a limited-run newsletter about life where the United States and Mexico meet.]Katie Benner covers the Justice Department. She was part of a team that won a Pulitzer Prize in 2018 for public service for reporting on workplace sexual harassment issues.
@ktbenner Nicholas Fandos is a reporter in the Washington bureau covering Congress.
@npfandos Charlie Savage is a Washington-based national security and legal policy correspondent. A recipient of the Pulitzer Prize, he previously worked at The Boston Globe and The Miami Herald. His most recent book is “Power Wars: The Relentless Rise of Presidential Authority and Secrecy.”
@charlie_savage • Facebook AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsSenate Confirms William Barr as Attorney General - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Senate Confirms William Barr as Attorney GeneralAdvertisementSupported bySenate Confirms William Barr as Attorney GeneralImageWilliam P. Barr, who was confirmed as attorney general largely along party lines on Thursday, takes the reins of the Justice Department for a second time.CreditCreditGabriella Demczuk for The New York TimesBy Katie Benner and Nicholas FandosFeb. 14, 2019WASHINGTON — The Senate confirmed William P. Barr on Thursday for a second stint as attorney general, handing oversight of the Justice Department — and its investigation into links between Russia’s interference in the 2016 election and the Trump campaign — to a seasoned Republican legal hand known for his expansive view of presidential power.Mr. Barr was sworn in hours later, beginning a new chapter for a department that has been battered by criticism from President Trump. The president lost confidence in and publicly scorned his first attorney general, Jeff Sessions, after he recused himself from overseeing the Russia investigation. The department was further rattled when Mr. Trump installed a relatively inexperienced loyalist, Matthew G. Whitaker, Mr. Sessions’s chief of staff, as a temporary replacement in November.Mr. Barr faces an array of challenges, not least retaining the confidence of both Mr. Trump and Congress as he steers the department through the anticipated conclusion of the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, and the question of whether and how to make any report from Mr. Mueller public.Morale has suffered among the department’s 115,000 employees amid accusations that its work has been politicized. And Mr. Barr will presumably want to put his own stamp on the administration’s agenda following Mr. Sessions, who for all his problems with the president pushed successfully to put in place conservative policies on civil rights, voting rights, immigration, drugs, policing and crime, among other issues.When Mr. Barr accepted Mr. Trump’s offer to be nominated for the job, “he saw the department as an institution facing some very challenging times,” said George J. Terwilliger, who served as the deputy attorney general under Mr. Barr in the 1990s.In the latest example of the extraordinary strains the Trump presidency has put on the department, a former deputy F.B.I. director, Andrew G. McCabe, said in an interview broadcast on Thursday that in May 2017, top department officials discussed whether to recruit cabinet members to invoke the 25th Amendment to remove the president from office.Mr. Barr’s ability to treat the special counsel’s investigation fairly has been questioned ever since it emerged that he wrote a 19-page memo last summer arguing that Mr. Mueller should not treat Mr. Trump’s decision to fire James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, as obstruction of justice.“There are some people who are very concerned given the 19-page memo that he wrote,” said Neal Katyal, who was acting solicitor general under President Barack Obama.How Every Senator Voted on Barr’s Confirmation as Attorney GeneralThe Senate voted 54-45 to confirm William P. Barr as attorney general.“Barr needs to bring back respect for the rule of law and ensure that law enforcement is treated as the nonpartisan, public safety and public-good-oriented organization that it has been for decades,” Mr. Katyal said.The department has been under public, political attack from the moment Mr. Mueller was given the job in May 2017 of investigating whether the Trump campaign had worked with Russia to sway the election.Inside the department, career employees worried that Mr. Sessions was politicizing its day-to-day work and redefining who deserved civil rights protections, particularly on matters like gay rights and the oversight of police departments that had histories of racial discrimination.Mr. Barr assured senators during the confirmation process that he would not allow political interference to sway the department’s work, but under pressure from Democrats, he would make no specific assurances to make Mr. Mueller’s findings public.Divided over whether to accept his assurances, the Senate voted largely along party lines, 54 to 45, to confirm Mr. Barr.A handful of senators broke from their parties. One libertarian-leaning Republican, Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, voted against Mr. Barr, citing concerns over his sweeping view of executive power. Three Democrats from conservative or swing states — Senators Doug Jones of Alabama, Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona and Joe Manchin III of West Virginia — supported Mr. Barr.Mr. Barr previously served as attorney general from 1991 to 1993, under President George Bush, before spending the last quarter-century as a corporate lawyer — much of it with the telecommunications company that became Verizon. With that experience, he could bring a pro-corporate point of view to the work of the department’s antitrust division.While Mr. Barr served on the board of Time Warner, the Justice Department tried to block the company’s merger with AT&T in 2017. Mr. Barr said in a legal filing in the case that the department’s decision was “inexplicable” and could have been motivated by a desire to satisfy Mr. Trump’s personal animus toward CNN, which is owned by Time Warner.“As a former attorney general,” Mr. Barr wrote at the time, “that is disturbing to me.”Even before the confirmation vote, Mr. Barr was planning steps to begin putting his imprint on the department. He intends to call on Jeffrey A. Rosen, the current deputy transportation secretary, to serve as deputy attorney general, two people briefed on the choice said. His nomination would be subject to a Senate vote.VideoWilliam P. Barr, President Trump’s nominee for attorney general, said “it is in the best interest of everyone” that the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, be allowed to finish his investigation. He also pledged not to allow the president to “correct and put spin on” a Mueller report before it was released publicly.CreditCreditSarah Silbiger/The New York TimesRod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general who appointed Mr. Mueller and oversaw his work until late last year, plans to remain at the department for a transition period expected to last only a few weeks.Like Mr. Barr, Mr. Rosen was a longtime lawyer at the firm Kirkland & Ellis, where he was a member of its global management team. He held senior positions at the Office of Management and Budget and the Transportation Department during President George W. Bush’s administration.But Mr. Rosen’s lack of prosecutorial experience makes him a somewhat unusual choice, given that one of his main jobs will be to oversee the United States attorney’s offices, and the department’s national security division.“All of the Justice Department’s national security and law enforcement components report directly to the deputy attorney general, so it’s helpful if that person has had past experience in those areas,” said Matthew S. Axelrod, who was the top aide to Sally Q. Yates, a deputy attorney general during the Obama administration.While Mr. Barr largely sailed through his confirmation process, Democrats expressed concern about how he would handle the special counsel’s investigation and other inquiries by federal prosecutors in New York looking at Mr. Trump’s campaign, his business and his inaugural committee.Democrats seized on the lengthy legal memo that Mr. Barr wrote in June for the Trump administration and shared with Mr. Trump’s outside legal team. It argued that the president wielded unchecked power to “start or stop a law enforcement proceeding,” and therefore Mr. Mueller should not be allowed to investigate whether Mr. Trump committed obstruction of justice by pressuring Mr. Comey to drop an investigation into a top aide.And Mr. Barr resisted making any specific commitments or pledges to Democrats to make public Mr. Mueller’s final report, saying instead he would be as transparent as possible and obey all Justice Department regulations for special counsel investigations.Those rules envision a report to the attorney general, who then sends a separate notification to Congress explaining that the investigation has ended.Republicans said those assurances were sufficient. But Democrats were not satisfied.“Everything that is my concern is in the memo, the 19-page memo he wrote five months before he was appointed,” said Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, the top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee. “To me, it was an invitation to be appointed with his support for the unitary executive and the all-powerful president.”Kate Kelly contributed reporting from New York. Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Barr Begins Second Stint Atop Justice Department. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageBarr Clears Key Hurdle for Confirmation as Attorney GeneralFeb. 12, 2019ImageA Divided Senate Committee Advances William Barr NominationFeb. 7, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptions‘He May Not Even Be a Free Person,’ Elizabeth Warren Says of Trump in 2020 - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|‘He May Not Even Be a Free Person,’ Elizabeth Warren Says of Trump in 2020AdvertisementSupported by‘He May Not Even Be a Free Person,’ Elizabeth Warren Says of Trump in 2020ImageSenator Elizabeth Warren at a campaign rally at the University of Iowa in Iowa City on Sunday.CreditCreditTamir Kalifa for The New York TimesBy Alexander BurnsFeb. 10, 2019CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa — Countless Democratic leaders have urged the party not to spend the 2020 campaign tangling with President Trump over tweets and taunts. But Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts made a novel argument on Sunday for ignoring the president: He could soon be in jail.Addressing a crowd of several hundred at the Veterans Memorial Building in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Ms. Warren said it was up to Democrats to decide whether they would spend every day parrying “a racist tweet, a hateful tweet, something really dark and ugly” from the president. She said the party should ask: “Are we going to let him use those to divide us?”“By the time we get to 2020, Donald Trump may not even be president,” Ms. Warren said. “In fact, he may not even be a free person.”Prodded by reporters to explain the remark a few hours later in Iowa City, Ms. Warren said she was simply noting the proliferation of inquiries into the president.“It’s no longer just the Mueller investigation,” Ms. Warren said. “They’re everywhere and these are serious investigations, so we’ll see what happens.”In addition to the investigation by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, into Russian interference in the 2016 election, there are continuing investigations spearheaded by federal prosecutors in New York and by the Democratic majority in the House of Representatives. Mr. Trump has denied any wrongdoing related to the 2016 campaign and Russia, and there is no indication that the president himself could be indicted or incarcerated before the 2020 election.Ms. Warren’s remark was an unusually blunt jab at Mr. Trump, from a candidate who has largely declined to spar personally with the president since her entry into the 2020 race. Mr. Trump has repeatedly ridiculed Ms. Warren, often in personal terms and with racist slurs, for having in the past identified herself as having Native American ancestry. Ms. Warren recently apologized to the Cherokee Nation for having done so.On Saturday, Mr. Trump appeared to invoke the Trail of Tears, the infamously cruel forced relocation of Native Americans in the early 19th century that caused thousands of deaths, when he mocked Ms. Warren on Twitter: “See you on the campaign TRAIL, Liz.” Ms. Warren did not refer explicitly to the Twitter post on Sunday.[For those who need a refresher, here is a brief history of the Trail of Tears.]Aside from the imprisonment crack, Ms. Warren spent little time in Iowa discussing Mr. Trump’s legal issues and caustic persona. She played down talk of impeachment and stressed to reporters that she was focused on “structural” problems that “were broken long before Donald Trump got here.”She was not the only Democrat to suggest obliquely in Iowa this weekend that Mr. Trump might meet a swift downfall of some kind. Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, in his first trip to Iowa as a presidential candidate, suggested in passing on Saturday that if he won the Democratic nomination, he was not certain he would face Mr. Trump in the general election.“Should I be our nominee and Trump also be the nominee — I’m not sure if he will be — but if he is the nominee, you will see the toughest, strongest person standing against him,” Mr. Booker said. “Whatever he wants to throw at me, bring it.”A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: Warren Says Trump May Be in Jail in 2020. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageElizabeth Warren Formally Announces 2020 Presidential Bid in Lawrence, Mass.Feb. 9, 2019ImageAmy Klobuchar Enters 2020 Presidential RaceFeb. 10, 2019ImageElizabeth Warren Announces Iowa Trip as She Starts Running for President in 2020Dec. 31, 2018ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsTrump, in Interview, Calls Wall Talks ‘Waste of Time’ and Dismisses Investigations - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Trump, in Interview, Calls Wall Talks ‘Waste of Time’ and Dismisses InvestigationsAdvertisementSupported byTrump, in Interview, Calls Wall Talks ‘Waste of Time’ and Dismisses InvestigationsVideoIn an interview with The New York Times, President Trump indicated that he would most likely take action on a border wall on his own after talks with Congress end in two weeks, among other subjects.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesBy Peter Baker and Maggie HabermanJan. 31, 2019WASHINGTON — A defiant President Trump declared on Thursday that he has all but given up on negotiating with Congress over his border wall and will build it on his own even as he dismissed any suggestions of wrongdoing in the investigations that have ensnared his associates.In an interview in the Oval Office, Mr. Trump called the talks “a waste of time” and indicated he will most likely take action on his own when they officially end in two weeks. At the same time, he expressed optimism about reaching a trade deal with China and denied being at odds with his intelligence chiefs.“I think Nancy Pelosi is hurting our country very badly by doing what she’s doing and, ultimately, I think I’ve set the table very nicely,” Mr. Trump said. He made no mention of closing the government again, a move that backfired on him, but instead suggested he plans to declare a national emergency to build the wall. “I’ve set the table,” he said. “I’ve set the stage for doing what I’m going to do.”Addressing a wide range of subjects, Mr. Trump brushed off the investigations that have consumed so much of his presidency, saying that his lawyers have been reassured by the departing deputy attorney general, Rod J. Rosenstein, that the president himself was not a target. “He told the attorneys that I’m not a subject, I’m not a target,” Mr. Trump said. But even if that is the case, it remains unknown whether the matter would be referred to the House for possible impeachment hearings.[Read excerpts from the interview with the president.]Mr. Trump added that he never spoke with Roger J. Stone Jr., his longtime associate who was indicted last week, about WikiLeaks and the stolen Democratic emails it posted during the 2016 election, nor did he direct anyone to do so.“No, I didn’t. I never did,” he said of speaking with Mr. Stone on the subject. Did he ever instruct anyone to get in touch with Mr. Stone about WikiLeaks? “Never did,” he repeated.The president dismissed the importance of the proposed Trump Tower his team was seeking to build in Moscow at the height of the 2016 campaign, and he denied his own current lawyer’s account of how late in the campaign he was still discussing the project. He also denied that his Twitter messages about former associates who are cooperating with prosecutors amount to witness tampering.Mr. Trump said he played no role in directing White House officials to arrange for Jared Kushner, his son-in-law and senior adviser, to receive a top-secret clearance. Mr. Kushner’s application was rejected at least once after concerns were raised by the F.B.I. about his foreign contacts. The C.I.A., which also raised concerns, has continued to deny him access to “sensitive compartmentalized information.”The interview with Mr. Trump came on a busy day at the White House as the president seeks to rebound from the 35-day partial government shutdown that failed to force Democrats to finance his wall and took a toll on his poll numbers. With most Americans blaming him for the standoff, Mr. Trump expressed frustration that he has not gotten credit for what he sees as his accomplishments, including deregulation, increased military spending and nuclear talks with North Korea.Fresh from a meeting on trade with China’s vice premier, Mr. Trump seemed relaxed and confident as he sought to make his case, distributing handouts including, at one point, printed copies of two tweets sent out in his name even as he was speaking with his visitors.The interview was arranged after Mr. Trump reached out to A. G. Sulzberger, the publisher of The New York Times, and invited him for an off-the-record dinner. Mr. Sulzberger declined, saying he would prefer an on-the-record interview that included two of his reporters. The president agreed.‘I Love This Job’Mr. Trump sat behind the Resolute Desk, sipping periodically from a glass of Diet Coke with ice cubes floating in it and resting on a gold coaster. His acting chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney; his senior communications adviser, Bill Shine; and his press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, sat in on the session with Mr. Sulzberger and the two reporters.Mr. Trump spoke with a low voice, his arms folded tightly during questions about the Russia inquiry as his aides grew fidgety. But he was more good-humored at other points. He grew most animated when condemning media coverage he considers unfair.[Read the president’s comments about the news media, which, in lengthy and at times contradictory remarks, he deemed “important” and “beautiful,” but also “so bad” and “unfair.”]He disputed persistent reports of dysfunction in the White House, noting that members of his staff write up summaries of kiss-and-tell books that have been published for him to peruse. “I have somebody — boom boom, they give me the quotes.”At one point, he scoffed at the notion that he was making money from the presidency, calling the job a “loser” financially.“I lost massive amounts of money doing this job,” he said. “This is not the money. This is one of the great losers of all time. You know, fortunately, I don’t need money. This is one of the great losers of all time. But they’ll say that somebody from some country stayed at a hotel. And I’ll say, ‘Yeah.’ But I lose, I mean, the numbers are incredible.”Still, he rejected speculation that he might not run for re-election next year. “I love this job,” he said. And he said he did not think he would face a challenger for the his party’s presidential nomination, even though several Republicans are considering running. “I don’t see it,” he said. “I have great support in the party.”Watching the emerging Democratic field, Mr. Trump said the opposition party has “really drifted far left,” and he derided Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts as damaged while expressing admiration for the campaign kickoff of Senator Kamala Harris of California, who drew thousands of supporters.“I would say the best opening so far would be Kamala Harris,” he said, pronouncing it “Kameela.” “I would say in terms of the opening act, I would say, would be her.” He added, “A better crowd — better crowd, better enthusiasm.”ImageListen to ‘The Daily’: The President and the PublisherDuring an interview in the Oval Office, the publisher of The New York Times questioned President Trump about his attacks on the press.transcriptBack to The Dailybars0:00/32:40-32:40transcriptListen to ‘The Daily’: The President and the PublisherHosted by Michael Barbaro, produced by Theo Balcomb and Rachel Quester, and edited by Lisa TobinDuring an interview in the Oval Office, the publisher of The New York Times questioned President Trump about his attacks on the press.michael barbaroFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today: On Thursday in the Oval Office, the president of the United States debated the publisher of The New York Times about the role of a free press. It’s Friday, February 1. Oh, for the purposes of this interview, how would you like me to refer to you, like, in terms of your actual name? Do you want to be A. G.? Do you want to be Arthur?a g sulzbergerA. G., yeah.michael barbaroO.K. Good. A. G., tell me the story of what happened this past summer.a g sulzbergerWell, I had recently been named publisher of The Times. And I was coming back from dinner one day, and I got a email from Sarah Sanders — not someone who had emailed me before — and she asked if I could come to the White House later that week for a private, off-the-record meeting with the president. Our journalists are typically extremely cautious about giving off-the-record meetings to prominent newsmakers. But it’s part of the responsibility that comes with being publisher to be willing to sit down across from folks who are regularly receiving coverage, particularly regularly receiving tough coverage, and hear if they have any concerns. So I felt that I should accept. Meeting face to face with the president, I felt it was really important to raise some of my concerns about his increasingly strong anti-press rhetoric. I also felt pretty strongly that I should bring a journalist along as well. So I brought James Bennet, my colleague who oversees the Opinion department, including the editorial page, and we headed down to Washington.michael barbaroAnd what happened?a g sulzbergerJames asked most of the questions as the journalist in the room. And then at some point, I sensed a natural break in the conversation, and I brought up what I had been wanting to share with him. I said to the president, I’m increasingly alarmed by your anti-press rhetoric. You know, phrases like “fake news” I find very troubling. But I’m deeply concerned about the implication of phrases like “enemy of the people.” And I believe that this language is not just divisive, it’s dangerous.michael barbaroAnd this is all off-the-record, so this is just a message that you very much wanted to deliver to the president directly.a g sulzbergerThat’s right. And it was a civil meeting. He did hear me out. And at the end of the conversation, after we had stood up and were preparing to leave, he thanked us again for coming in, turned to me, pointed to his head and said, you’ve given me a lot to think about. And I really will think about it.michael barbaroSo you leave the White House, and what happens?a g sulzbergerSo largely nothing. I go back to work. He goes back to work. And about a week, maybe 10 days later, I’m at home. It was Sunday morning. I think I was either changing a diaper or had just finished changing a diaper. And I get a call that informs me that the president has just tweeted about our meeting.archived recordingSome breaking news now as The New York Times goes to Washington. President Trump tweeted just a little while ago that he met with A. G. Sulzberger, the relatively new publisher of The New York Times, at the White House recently. Tweeting this today. Quote, “Had a very good and interesting meeting at the White House with A. G. Sulzberger, publisher of The New York Times.” President Trump continuing, quote, “Spent much time talking about the vast amounts of fake news being put out by the media and how that fake news has morphed into the phrase ‘enemy of the people.’ Sad.”michael barbaroAnd is that your understanding of what happened in the room?a g sulzbergerNo. It was a gross mischaracterization of our conversation. I mean, certainly we had had a meeting at the White House. I’ll leave it to him to decide whether it was good and interesting. And we talked about his use of phrases like “fake news” and “enemy of the people.” But it was not a conversation in which I was agreeing with those characterizations in the least.michael barbaroSo what exactly did you do?a g sulzbergerSo I grabbed my laptop and typed out a very brief account of what had actually transpired in the meeting. We issue our statement, which I thought spoke for itself, and the news cycle moved on to other things, and I moved on to other things. And then six months later, this week, I get another email from Sarah Huckabee Sanders, this time asking me to join the president for a private dinner at the White House.michael barbaroHuh. And what are you thinking when you get that invitation?a g sulzbergerI’m thinking that I can’t possibly accept this invitation.michael barbaroWhy not?a g sulzbergerBecause I’m already reluctant about allowing people to go off the record. But the notion that I would do that with someone who had so clearly violated the terms that he had requested, and that I had agreed to, a second time just felt like a non-starter to me.michael barbaroSo you’re prepared, it sounds, to say no and to walk away from this opportunity.a g sulzbergerI did say no. I wrote an email back, which I thought was perfectly polite but also very direct, saying that given what had transpired the last time we had such a meeting, that I’d be unable to accept a private dinner with the president. But I also added — and I thought it was probably a long shot — that if the president was willing to meet on the record with several of our journalists for an interview, that I’d be happy to join.michael barbaroAnd what was the response?a g sulzbergerTo my surprise, the next day they said yes. So this morning, Maggie Haberman and I took the train down to D.C., where we met our colleague, Peter Baker, and prepared for the first significant on-the-record interview we’ve done with the president in over a year.michael barbaroAnd how are you thinking about this interview, because you’re the publisher of The Times. You’re not a reporter. But you are going to the White House with two of the Times’s star White House reporters. What exactly is this meeting, in your mind?a g sulzbergerWell, that’s exactly right. My role in that room is very different than Maggie and Peter’s. So you know, when we sat down to plan it out, I made very clear that I would leave the reporting part of the meeting entirely to them. But I also said that there were a few things that I wanted to convey to the president following up on our previous meeting.michael barbaroEssentially some unfinished business.a g sulzbergerThat’s right. The White House is just a few blocks from the bureau, so maybe 20 minutes before the meeting, we headed out into the cold and walked over. Got to the White House security. Maggie breezed through, Peter breezed through, and then it turns out that I had not been entered into the system. So I found myself standing outside in the cold for quite some time while they decided what to do with me.michael barbaroAnd what did they decide to do with you?a g sulzbergerEventually some embarrassed member of the communications team came over and apologized for forgetting to enter me into the system. And I guess I passed whatever test of trustworthiness, and they gave me a pass and went through security. So we get in. We’re escorted into the Oval Office and take some seats in front of the president’s desk. He walks in the room.maggie habermanMr. President, good to see you.a g sulzbergerShakes each of our hands.president trumpSit down, please.peter bakerThank you.a g sulzbergerVery friendly. And we begin the conversation.president trumpWe just had a great meeting with the vice premier of China.a g sulzbergerPretty early in the conversation, he talks about how, just moments earlier, there was a group of Chinese leaders there, along with most of his cabinet, for trade negotiations.president trumpAnd we had it set so you could walk in. But were you delayed at the gate or something?maggie habermanThere was an incident. [LAUGHS]president trumpOh, what happened?a g sulzbergerOh, everything’s fine. That he had been very much hoping that we would see the impressive scene and wondered why we were late.maggie habermanWe’re fine. Everything’s fine.a g sulzbergerI think I looked like a suspect individual.president trumpYou look good.maggie habermanThey weren’t sure they wanted to let A. G. in.president trumpYou look good.a g sulzbergerAt which point Sarah Huckabee Sanders had to let him know that I had been blocked at the gate.michael barbaroYou were the reason why.a g sulzbergerI was the reason why.peter bakerSo having had the meeting today with the vice premier, do you feel like you got a deal, or close to a deal?president trumpWell, we’re getting closer.a g sulzbergerSo after some small talk, the interview begins. Maggie and Peter start going through their long list of questions.maggie habermanYou’ve talked about the sacrifice that this has presented for yourself, for your family, being president, for your business. Could you ever see a point in the next year where you say, you know what, I don’t need to do this again? I don’t need to run for re-election?president trumpI don’t see it because — so I just gave you a list of a lot of the things we’ve done. And this list isn’t even complete. I don’t know if you have it. Yeah. That’s not even — just grab it. Reading material for tonight.a g sulzbergerMaggie asks him whether he’s intent on running for another term.president trumpMaggie, here’s the bottom line. I love doing it. I don’t know if I should love doing it. But I love doing it.a g sulzbergerHe talks about his recent phone call with the head of the Venezuelan opposition.president trumpWe had a very good talk. Just more than anything else, I guess, I wished him good luck.a g sulzbergerHe talks about Nancy Pelosi.maggie habermanThis is your first experience dealing with Nancy Pelosi having the gavel as the speaker. Do you feel that you properly estimated her strengths? Do you feel like you underestimated them?president trumpI’ve actually always gotten along with her, but now I don’t think I will anymore. I think that she’s hurting the country very badly.a g sulzbergerAnd says that he’s given up on their relationship.president trumpIf she doesn’t approve a wall, the rest of it’s just a waste of money and time and energy.a g sulzbergerHe talks about the shutdown.president trumpBut based on what I hear and based on what I read, they don’t want to give money for the wall. You know I’m building the wall. You know that. I’m building the wall right now.a g sulzbergerYou know, for the beginning of the interview, he seems excited and engaged, almost gregarious. He’s talking in superlatives and with obvious excitement about the work and what he describes as his accomplishments.president trumpAnd one of the generals said, you’ve done more to defeat ISIS than any other person, not even close.a g sulzbergerAnd then, as the questions shift towards Russia —maggie habermanHas Rod Rosenstein given you any sense over the course of the last year about whether you have any exposure, either in — or there’s any concerns, or whether you’re a target of either Mueller or —president trumpWell, he told — he told the attorneys that I’m not a subject — I’m not a target. Yeah, oh yeah.a g sulzbergerAnd to the Cohen investigation.peter bakerCan I ask you, sir, can you clarify the Trump Tower Moscow proposal, right? There was this discussion. And we’ve learned since the campaign that this went on longer through the campaign than we had expected.president trumpSo let me tell you about Trump Tower Moscow. This was a very unimportant deal. This was a very unimportant deal.a g sulzbergerHe becomes visibly more cautious. His arms creep up and they’re now folded on his chest.peter bakerYou told people that you didn’t have any business there. And people might have misunderstood —president trumpWell, that wasn’t business.peter baker[INAUDIBLE] Misleading to say —president trumpPeter, that wasn’t business there. That was a —peter bakerWell, you’re pursuing the business, right?president trumpThat was essentially — I had no money invested.a g sulzbergerHis sentences are growing shorter.maggie habermanDid you ever talk to him about WikiLeaks? Because that seemed to be what Mueller was — you never had a conversation with him about that.president trumpNo, I didn’t.maggie habermanAnd did you ever tell him to — or other people to get in touch with him?president trumpNever did.a g sulzbergerAnd it’s clear he’s being cautious. At one point, he was visibly uncomfortable enough that Sarah Sanders sort of muttered under her breath, next topic.president trumpThis job is, from an economic — you know, I get a kick out of these people saying, oh, a rich Arab stayed at his hotel.a g sulzbergerAnd then, as we’ve seen in previous interviews with President Trump, there are a lot of interesting tangents that he’ll take.president trumpI lost massive amounts of money doing this job. This is not for money.a g sulzbergerOne of the more striking was him talking about how everyone assumes he’s making so much money and benefiting so much from being president, but that actually —president trumpThis is one of the great losers of all time. You know, fortunately I don’t need money.a g sulzbergerAssuming the office had come at a significant financial cost. And I think he used some language like, it’s the biggest loser.michael barbaroBeing president.a g sulzbergerThat’s right.president trumpBut I lose — I mean, the numbers are incredible.a g sulzbergerSo initially we had been told that the conversation would be around half an hour. And —maggie habermanMaggie, he’s been doing a great job. Yeah?speakerJust have some important calls whenever you’re finished.president trumpO.K. I’ll be in in a little while.a g sulzbergerLike clockwork, at about half an hour, his assistant came into the room and told him that time was up and he had a busy schedule.president trumpWhat’s more important than The New York Times, O.K.? Nothing.a g sulzbergerThe conversation continued like that for fully another half hour. So a full hour.speakerMr. President, we’re coming up on 45 minutes.president trumpYeah, that’s O.K.a g sulzbergerOn multiple occasions, Sarah Huckabee Sanders and Bill Shine tried to interject by saying, O.K., let’s do one or two more questions.maggie habermanMr. President, can I ask you a question that I was wondering as you were all talking about this?speakerAnd then maybe — [INAUDIBLE] Make this the last one.maggie habermanCan I ask you five more questions? [LAUGHTER]a g sulzbergerBut Maggie and Peter just kept right at it. And President Trump seemed happy and interested to continue to answer their questions.michael barbaroAnd what are you doing while Peter and Maggie are pressing the president on all these various questions?a g sulzbergerI didn’t say a word. I thought my role there was to open the doors for the two of them for an on-the-record interview.michael barbaroSo you stayed silent the entire time.a g sulzbergerThat’s right.president trumpThat doesn’t happen at The New York Times.a g sulzbergerMr. President, before we wind down, I didn’t want to miss the opportunity just to raise a concern that we discussed last time. But then I realized that the meeting was actually starting to wrap up. And it felt like the moment was right to share the concern that I wanted to raise with the president, which stemmed from our previous conversation. We discussed last time I was here.president trumpBy the way, you’re right. And I did not know, when we — did you apologize, I hope?sarah huckabee sandersYeah.president trumpBecause I did not know that. And I apologize for that. O.K.?a g sulzbergerThank you for saying that.president trumpI did not know that.a g sulzbergerAnd immediately he interjected and offered something of an apology. It took me a second to realize what it was about. But I believe he was apologizing for breaking the off-the-record agreement he had asked for in the previous meeting.michael barbaroAh, the tweet.a g sulzbergerBut I circled back and said — So the concern I raised then was about your anti-press rhetoric — fake news, enemy of the people. And at the time, I said I was concerned that it wasn’t just divisive, it was potentially dangerous, and warned that I thought it could have consequences. I feel like in the time since, we’ve started to see some of those consequences play out. We’ve seen around the world an unprecedented rise in attacks on journalists, threats to journalists, censorship. And as I’m saying this, he is leaning in and asking questions. Jailing of journalists and murders of journalists.president trumpWhere in particular?a g sulzbergerGlobally on every continent. I’m happy to send you some of the literature. It’s very closely tracked. But one of the things that’s been really striking to me is, as I’ve talked to my colleagues around the globe, working in different countries — particularly working in countries where a free press is already a tenuous thing — they say that they are increasingly of the belief that your rhetoric is creating a climate in which dictators and tyrants are able to employ your words in suppressing the free press. And I wanted to —michael barbaroSo it sounds like you two are having a genuine back-and-forth about the concerns you have about the dangers facing journalists, and your belief that he, as president, is contributing to that.a g sulzbergerThat’s right. That’s right. And to his credit, he heard me out and he listened to it. I guess the concern I want to raise is the effects that the broad-based attacks on journalism and journalists continue to have seems to be growing. And it particularly seems to be growing abroad with folks who aren’t covering your administration. They’re trying to do hard, dangerous work of ferreting out the truth in societies where the leadership often tries to suppress it. And I’d urge you to reconsider these attacks.president trumpI understand that.a g sulzbergerBut if you choose not to, I want you to be aware of some of the consequences that I’m starting to see out there.president trumpWould you say more so now than over the last five years?a g sulzbergerYes.president trumpRight now? I mean —a g sulzbergerYes.president trumpBut more so now than even a year ago.a g sulzbergerYes. And I think —president trumpI’m not happy to hear that.a g sulzbergerThe murder of Khashoggi is just the highest-profile example. But we’re seeing —michael barbaroA. G., are you experiencing the president’s questions and reactions as authentic? Because suddenly it’s starting to sound like he’s saying the things that a publisher of The New York Times might want to hear.a g sulzbergerYeah, I think that’s right. The United States and the occupants of your office historically have been the greatest defenders of a free press and of free speech globally.president trumpAnd I think I am, too. I want to be. I want to be.a g sulzbergerLook, it is hard for me to be optimistic about breaking through to him given that I had raised this exact set of concerns six months earlier, and he had said he was listening, said he was troubled by what he had heard, said that he thought his rhetoric had probably gone too far, and said that he would think about toning it down, and then has continued, if not escalated, his attacks on the free press. So he made a good show of listening. He asked follow-up questions. He expressed concern about some of the things I said. But it wasn’t fully clear whether I was getting through to him. And I wanted to circle back to this, first, I guess, to ask you if you were aware of these broad consequences that we’re seeing.president trumpSo the person, honestly, that’s been most suggestive of that is you, more so than others. I do notice that people are declaring more and more fake news, where they go, fake news. I even see it in other countries. I don’t necessarily attribute that to me. I think I can attribute the term to me. I think I was the one that started using it, I would say. But I do see that. But —a g sulzbergerBut can I just respond to that?president trumpYes, please, go ahead.a g sulzbergerBecause the phrase “fake news,” you’re exactly right. It has been embraced globally. And several countries have actually banned fake news. But it was a technique to actually ban an independent media. And so it’s not about viral stuff on Facebook. It’s about countries using that term to actually ban independent scrutiny of their actions.president trumpRight. I’ve seen that.a g sulzbergerYeah.president trumpI don’t like that. I mean, I don’t like that. I don’t like — though I do think it’s very bad for a country when the news is not accurately portrayed. I really do.a g sulzbergerAnd after this conversation goes on for a few minutes, he takes it in an interesting direction, and perhaps a predictable direction.michael barbaroWhich is what?a g sulzbergerHe starts complaining about his own coverage and explaining he feels that he has been inaccurately portrayed.president trumpAnd I do believe I’m a victim of that, honestly. In all due respect, I know what a good writer these two people are. But Peter’s been very tough on us the last couple of months. I don’t know why, because I really think I’m doing a great job.a g sulzbergerAnd at one point, he mentions Peter specifically, and says his recent articles have been too tough. Can I just say something on Peter? I mean, Peter has covered four administrations, four presidential administrations, starting with Clinton.president trumpI know.a g sulzbergerBut one of the things that we’ve learned over a century and a half of covering the men who’ve occupied this office is that every occupant feels that the press is too tough at times. But tough coverage is part of occupying the most powerful seat on earth. That chair right there that you’re sitting in is the most powerful seat on earth. And it comes with it scrutiny and questions. You have my — speaking for The Times — my enduring commitment that we will treat you fairly and accurately. I actually noticed a oil painting of President Lincoln over his shoulder, and I said, we’ve been covering presidential administrations for 150 years. Starting, I think, with that guy.president trumpHe was a good one.a g sulzbergerYeah, he’s a good one.michael barbaroOne of the best.a g sulzbergerYeah.president trumpI understand that. And I do. I would say this. I don’t mind a bad story if it’s true. I really don’t. You know, we’re all, like, big people. We understand what’s happening. I’ve had bad stories, very bad stories, where I thought it was true. And I would never complain. But when you get really bad stories where it’s not true, then you sort of say, that’s unfair. And, you know, you have a tremendous power. You have the power of the pen, the power of the ink. You have a tremendous power.a g sulzbergerAnd so we continued to go back and forth. And the striking thing about the conversation now is if the first hour of the conversation felt very much like a traditional interview — questions being asked by Maggie and Peter, and questions being answered by President Trump — now the conversation had taken a real turn, and it felt like we were having a searching debate about the role of media.president trumpWhat you do is a very important thing. And I will tell you, I would love if I was just covered fairly. If I were covered fairly — like, this should be a fair story. I don’t know what the story is — this should be a fair story. I actually think your readers would respect it.a g sulzbergerThere were interruptions. There was back and forth. And if at first he was listening to my concern, he became increasingly animated in sharing his concerns.michael barbaroI mean, this is fascinating. I’m curious, were you surprised in the moment by how this conversation was playing out, that it was becoming a conversation? Was that what you expected, because it seems like you had just wanted to reiterate a final point from your previous interview on the way out the door.a g sulzbergerI certainly wasn’t expecting the full back-and-forth, his level of interest and engagement in the conversation. At one point, Maggie jumped in.president trumpLet me look in the mirror.maggie habermanBut what do you see the role of the free press as? What is it that you think that the press does?a g sulzbergerAnd he gave her, in some ways, the most cautious, literal response that I’ve heard from him in either of my meetings with him.president trumpIt describes, and should describe, accurately what’s going on in anywhere it’s covering, whether it’s a nation or a state or a game or whatever. And if it describes it accurately and fairly, it’s a very, very important and beautiful thing.michael barbaroAnd do you agree with that definition of a free press?a g sulzbergerWell, I think his definition is accurate, but it’s also narrow. I view the core responsibility of The Times not just as helping people understand the world, but in seeking the truth wherever it leads, holding power to account. Those parts of our job can be hard to be on the other side of, and I’m sympathetic to that. But those are essential parts of how we meet our responsibility to inform the public. But I was really struck. There was this moment — it was a very human moment, and it seemed like a very sincere moment — when he talked about being a Queens-born kid.president trumpBut I came from Jamaica, Queens, Jamaica Estates, and I became president of the United States. I’m sort of entitled to a great story from my — just one — from my newspaper. I mean, you know.a g sulzbergerAnd he just wanted his hometown paper to write one positive story about him.michael barbaroHe just wants The Times to say something nice about him.a g sulzbergerThat’s what he said.president trumpI’m sort of entitled to one good story in The New York Times. I started off, I ran against very smart people and a lot of them.a g sulzbergerAnd he said it a few times.president trumpI just sort of think I’m entitled to a great story from The New York Times. I mean, I’ve done something that nobody’s ever done.michael barbaroWell, listening to the president talking about the media, did you feel that any of his complaints about the media were legitimate and recognizable?a g sulzbergerI don’t buy his premise that he hasn’t had that positive story. The first story he got was “Trump Triumphs.” You know, that was literally the headline. But he’s a disruptive political figure who has had an incredibly divisive approach to governing, and the coverage has reflected that.michael barbaroSo what do you think that this conversation meant to President Trump, and why do you think it became a conversation in the first place?a g sulzbergerI don’t know if I have the answer to that. I mean, obviously, this is a man whose public posture is that journalists are the enemy of the people. And I’ll tell you, part of what troubles me so much about that phrase is what do you do with enemies? You fight them. You lock them up. You kill them in war. But that’s never been President Trump’s private posture with journalists. And I think what this conversation showed is this is actually a man with a lot of respect for The New York Times as an institution. And I think he wants to feel that respect back. But he wants to feel it in a certain kind of way, with celebration of his actions, with validation of his performance, that I’m not sure a serious news organization, an independent news organization, can give any president. And so we have this tension between a president who, in a room with three journalists, can have a really interesting, open conversation about the role of journalism and the role of his own rhetoric in putting journalists at risk. But in public, I’m not sure we can expect change. I hope it’ll change. I really do. But I’m skeptical.michael barbaroA. G., thank you very much. We appreciate it.a g sulzbergerThank you, Michael.“Some of the others were very flat,” he added. “I do think Elizabeth Warren’s been hurt very badly with the Pocahontas trap,” he added, using a favorite slur to refer to the senator’s effort to prove she has Native American heritage. “I think she’s been hurt badly. I may be wrong, but I think that was a big part of her credibility, and now all of a sudden it’s gone.”The president had tough words as well for Ms. Pelosi, who has adamantly refused to approve even a dollar of the $5.7 billion he has sought for his border wall, which she has denounced as “immoral.” Mr. Trump had gambled that he could force her to back down through the government shutdown and was vexed when he could not.“I’ve actually always gotten along with her, but now I don’t think I will anymore,” Mr. Trump said. “I think she’s doing a tremendous disservice to the country. If she doesn’t approve a wall, the rest of it’s just a waste of money and time and energy because it’s desperately needed.”Mr. Trump has been considering an emergency declaration to spend money on a wall even without congressional approval, an action that even some Republicans have objected to and that would certainly draw a court challenge. “I’ll continue to build the wall and we’ll get the wall finished,” he said. “Now whether or not I declare a national emergency — that you’ll see.”Defends Syria PolicyThe president defended his decisions to pull troops out of Syria and draw down forces in Afghanistan on the same day that the Senate advanced a Republican-sponsored measure condemning a “precipitous withdrawal” from those two countries. “I got elected on saying we’re getting out of these endless wars,” he said.Given that, however, Mr. Trump did not explain why he has taken such an assertive stance in trying to force out President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela, even leaving open a military option, while not criticizing other autocratic countries like Saudi Arabia. “I’m just saying this: Terrible things are going on,” he said. “Terrible things are going on in Venezuela.”“Now in Saudi Arabia, a lot of improvement has been made in Saudi Arabia,” he said, while adding that the assassination of the Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi was “a terrible crime.”On another point of contention, the president noted that he summoned his intelligence chiefs, including Dan Coats, the national intelligence director, to the White House on Thursday because he had heard they had contradicted his foreign policy during testimony this week to Congress. Mr. Coats and the others told lawmakers that North Korea was unlikely to give up its nuclear arsenal, that Iran has not restarted work to build one and that the Islamic State was not defeated, all assessments that clash with the president’s worldview.But Mr. Trump said the intelligence chiefs told him their presentation was misinterpreted. “They said, ‘Sir, our testimony was totally mischaracterized,’” Mr. Trump said. “I said, ‘What are you talking about?’ And when you read their testimony and you read their statements, it was mischaracterized by the media.” Even though he had assailed the chiefs earlier in the week, he said, “I’m happy with Dan Coats.”Mr. Trump said he has likewise received reassurances from Mr. Rosenstein, who until Attorney General Jeff Sessions was fired in November was overseeing the Russia investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.“Rod told me I’m not a target of the investigation,” he said at one point, but then later suggested he had not talked with him directly. “The lawyers ask him. They say, ‘He’s not a target of the investigation.’” Asked if that also covered the separate investigation by federal prosecutors in New York, he said, “I don’t know about that.”Neither Mr. Rosenstein nor Mr. Mueller has said whether Mr. Trump is a target, and the president could not recall when Mr. Rosenstein would have assured him. Mr. Mueller has been known to explore whether the president’s actions amounted to obstruction of justice. But since Justice Department policy bars indicting a sitting president, it is unclear whether the term “target” would apply.Mr. Trump denied having anything to do with Mr. Stone’s involvement with WikiLeaks, which during the 2016 campaign posted Democratic emails online that were stolen by Russian intelligence services. He expressed sympathy for Mr. Stone for his arrest at the hands of heavily armed F.B.I. agents.“I’ve always liked — I like Roger, he’s a character,” Mr. Trump said, insisting that the F.B.I. agents charging “a house like they did at six o’clock in the morning. I think that was a very sad thing for this country.”The Moscow ProjectMr. Trump offered a vague account of his involvement in the proposed Moscow project. Michael D. Cohen, his former personal lawyer, has pleaded guilty to lying to Congress about the project and told the authorities that talks continued into the summer of 2016, even as Mr. Trump was securing the Republican nomination.Rudolph W. Giuliani, the president’s current lawyer, said recently that talks went all the way through the November election, only to later claim that he was mistaken and speaking only hypothetically.“He was wrong,” Mr. Trump said on Thursday. “Rudy has been wrong a little bit. But what has happened is this: I didn’t care. That deal was not important. It was essentially a letter of intent or an option.”Asked when in 2016 the last conversation he had about the project was, he said, “I would say it was early to middle of the year. Now, I don’t know that Cohen didn’t go a little bit longer than that. I don’t think it would be much longer.” He added: “I was running for president; I was doing really well. The last thing I cared about was building a building.”Mr. Cohen has been the focus of Mr. Trump’s ire lately, including hostile tweets that his former lawyer and others interpreted as threats. Among other things, the president has written that the authorities should be looking into Mr. Cohen’s father-in-law.“It’s not witness tampering,” Mr. Trump said. “It’s not witness tampering at all.”Asked what the point was then, he said, “I think people have the right to speak their mind. You know, speaking your mind. I’ve heard that for a period of time. But other people have said it, too. I mean, many people have said it.”Mr. Trump denied that he was upset to see William P. Barr, his nominee for attorney general, attest to his long relationship with Mr. Mueller during his confirmation hearing and commit to letting the special counsel finish his investigation. “I did hear the statement and it was totally acceptable to me,” the president said.He said he was not initially aware that Mr. Barr, as a private lawyer, had drafted a memo criticizing Mr. Mueller’s possible approach to obstruction of justice. “I mean, I read it afterwards,” he said. “But I did not know.” He added, “I never read the memo.”A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Labels Talks on Wall ‘Waste of Time’. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated Coverage5 Takeaways From The Times’s Interview With President TrumpJan. 31, 2019ImageFact-Checking President Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesFeb. 1, 2019ImageExcerpts From Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesFeb. 1, 2019ImageShow AllAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsAsked to Stop Investigations, House Digs In - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Asked to Stop Investigations, House Digs InAdvertisementSupported byAsked to Stop Investigations, House Digs InImageSpeaker Nancy Pelosi on Tuesday after the State of the Union address at the Capitol.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesBy Nicholas FandosFeb. 6, 2019WASHINGTON — The House Intelligence Committee on Wednesday began a broad inquiry into whether Russia and other foreign powers may be exercising influence over President Trump, acting only hours after a defiant Speaker Nancy Pelosi declared that the House would not be cowed by the president’s “all-out threat” to drop its investigations of his administration.Other committees were zeroing in on similarly sensitive oversight targets. On Thursday, Democrats will begin their quest to secure the president’s long-suppressed tax returns. The chairman of the Judiciary Committee readied a subpoena for the acting attorney general, Matthew G. Whitaker, in case he tried to avoid Democratic questioning. And a House Appropriations subcommittee chairwoman began an inquiry into administration rule-bending during the 35-day partial government shutdown.“It’s our congressional responsibility, and if we didn’t do it, we would be delinquent in that,” Ms. Pelosi said of the House’s oversight role, hours after Mr. Trump used his State of the Union address to warn that “ridiculous partisan investigations” threatened the nation’s economic health and the prospects of bipartisan legislating.That, Ms. Pelosi said, “was a threat — it was an all-out threat.”The confrontation between a newly empowered House majority and a president of the opposite party drew comparisons to Democrats’ investigations of the George W. Bush administration after the 2006 elections and Republicans’ blitz of Barack Obama’s administration after the 2010 midterms. But Democrats and even some Republicans conceded that the targets offered up by Mr. Trump and his administration were far more numerous than his predecessors’, and his threats and protests have been more vocal.House and Senate negotiators are rushing to reach agreement on a border-security funding bill before the government again runs out of money at midnight Feb. 15, so Mr. Trump’s suggestion that bipartisan legislating will be impossible amid Democratic investigations could hold weight.But despite that warning, the gears of congressional oversight — which were mostly still under Republican control during Mr. Trump’s first two years in office — began to pick up speed on Wednesday in the portrait-lined hearing rooms of the House office buildings.Meeting for the first time this Congress, the Intelligence Committee laid out a five-point investigation of the president’s potential foreign entanglements that was far broader in scope than previously expected.Democrats said they had reopened the inquiry into Russia’s election interference efforts and possible collusion with the Trump campaign that the Republican majority closed last year. But they will layer on “interconnected lines of inquiry,” including whether Russia or other foreign actors hold financial or other leverage over Mr. Trump and his associates that at any point could have influenced American policy. Democrats also added a broadly construed obstruction of justice component to their work for the first time.Mr. Trump dismissed the inquiry after it was announced, targeting the Intelligence Committee chairman, Adam B. Schiff of California.“He’s just a political hack. He’s trying to build a name for himself,” Mr. Trump said, adding, “It’s called presidential harassment. And it’s unfortunate. And it really does hurt our country.”Mr. Schiff shot back, “I can understand why the idea of meaningful oversight terrifies the president. Look, several associates of his have gone to jail. Others are awaiting trial.”He said the expanded Russia investigation would be done in coordination with other committees, including the Financial Services Committee, which wants to determine whether Russia or other foreign actors laundered money through the Trump Organization.“Our job involves making sure the policy of the United States is being driven by the national interest,” Mr. Schiff said, “not by any financial entanglement, financial leverage or other form of compromise.”Intelligence Committee Republicans, who have already begun to accuse the Democrats of politically motivated overreach, did not endorse the inquiry’s parameters. In a separate statement, they called on Democrats to subpoena unnamed witnesses they recommended, and privately, they accused Democrats of being more interested in keeping a politically damaging issue alive for the 2020 elections than finding new facts.In its meeting, the committee also voted to share transcripts of witness interviews that it conducted related to Russian election interference with the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. Mr. Mueller has already used two such transcripts to charge associates of the president’s with lying to Congress, and Democrats believe others could have intentionally misled the committee.Other committees were making moves, too.The Judiciary Committee had called a meeting for Thursday to vote on a subpoena to compel testimony from Mr. Whitaker, if needed. Mr. Whitaker, a loyalist of the president’s who is currently overseeing Mr. Mueller’s work, is scheduled to testify voluntarily on Friday, but Democrats have concerns that he might try to back out or dodge questions about the firing of his predecessor, about the president’s attacks on the Justice Department and about other matters related to the Mueller inquiry.“For the first two years of the Trump administration, Congress allowed government witnesses to dodge uncomfortable questions,” the committee’s chairman, Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York, wrote in a statement. “That era is over.”Perhaps most personally for the president, a Ways and Means oversight subcommittee will hold its first hearing on Thursday to start building a public rationale to pursue Mr. Trump’s tax returns.An obscure provision in the federal tax code gives the chairman of the committee unilateral powers to request from the Treasury Department tax information on any filer, including the president.Democrats view obtaining Mr. Trump’s returns — which he has refused to release, defying modern political norms — as necessary for their broader inquiries into potential conflicts of interest between his role as president and his business operations, as well as accusations of money laundering that may have involved Russian oligarchs or other financial crimes. But the request is fraught with tension, both because of an anticipated legal challenge from the administration and because of pressure from the party’s left flank on leaders who are proceeding slowly to try to build an airtight public relations and legal case first.Meantime, Representative Betty McCollum of Minnesota, the chairwoman of the Appropriations subcommittee that funds the Interior Department, asked the Government Accountability Office to issue a formal opinion on the administration’s diversion of user fees at the national parks to fund operations during the government shutdown. Such funds are supposed to be earmarked for long-term capital improvement projects.And Democrats on the Oversight and Reform Committee took their own swipe at the president at a hearing examining proposed ethics rules for the executive branch.“Both Democratic and Republican ethics experts warned President Trump to do this years ago, but he refused,” said Representative Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland, the chairman of the committee. “They warned that every decision he made could be questioned, and the American people would rightly wonder whether he was serving the nation’s interests or his own financial interests. Unfortunately, that is exactly what has happened over the past two years.”Advisers around the president have been preparing for the congressional onslaught for months, and they know there is little hope of dissuading Democrats, who won control of the House by promising to be a check on Mr. Trump. That, and the long history of congressional oversight of the executive branch, made Mr. Trump’s comments on Tuesday night all the more surprising to lawmakers.“An economic miracle is taking place in the United States — and the only thing that can stop it are foolish wars, politics or ridiculous partisan investigations,” the president said amid a broader call for bipartisan cooperation. “If there is going to be peace and legislation, there cannot be war and investigation. It just doesn’t work that way!”Ms. Pelosi called that a false choice, telling reporters on Wednesday that Democrats could engage with Mr. Trump on issues like immigration and reducing prescription drug pricing while also holding his administration accountable.While the president’s strongest allies on Capitol Hill sought to train attention on Democrats’ aggressive maneuvering, other Republicans shrugged off Mr. Trump’s comments.“The president has a habit of expressing what he is feeling, and he expresses himself often,” said Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee. “But he also enjoys going to bill signing ceremonies, like the one we had for criminal justice reform. We are used to politics around here, and conflict, and the president can express himself, but we are going to continue to work on a bipartisan basis to get things done.”Earlier, in a closed-door meeting with House Democrats, the speaker had privately criticized the president over his State of the Union address.“He was a guest in our House chamber, and we treated him with more respect than he treated us,” she told fellow lawmakers, according to a Democratic aide in the room who was not authorized to discuss the private session publicly.Ms. Pelosi also took a dig at Mr. Trump’s plan, detailed on Tuesday, to invest $500 million over 10 years toward the development of new cures for childhood cancer, characterizing it as paltry.“Five hundred million dollars over 10 years — are you kidding me?” she said, according to the aide. “Who gave him that figure? It’s like the cost of his protection of his Mar-a-Lago or something.”Glenn Thrush and Catie Edmondson contributed reporting. Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Asked to Stop Investigations, House Digs In. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageWith a House Takeover, Democrats Could Get Trump’s Tax Returns. Would They?Oct. 16, 2018ImageTrump Asks for Unity, but Presses Hard Line on ImmigrationFeb. 5, 2019ImageTranscript: Trump’s State of the Union, AnnotatedFeb. 5, 2019ImageState of the Union Fact Check: What Trump Got Right and WrongFeb. 5, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsManafort Lied After Plea Deal, Judge Says - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Manafort Lied After Plea Deal, Judge SaysAdvertisementSupported byManafort Lied After Plea Deal, Judge SaysImagePaul Manafort in 2018 in Washington.CreditCreditMandel Ngan/Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesBy Sharon LaFraniereFeb. 13, 2019WASHINGTON — A federal judge ruled on Wednesday that Paul Manafort, President Trump’s former campaign chairman, had breached his plea agreement by lying multiple times to prosecutors after pledging to cooperate with the special counsel’s investigation into Russia’s interference in the 2016 election.The decision by Judge Amy Berman Jackson of the United States District Court in Washington may affect the severity of punishment that awaits Mr. Manafort. Judge Jackson is scheduled to sentence him next month on two conspiracy counts, and he is also awaiting sentencing for eight other counts in a related fraud case.After Mr. Manafort agreed in September to cooperate with the office of the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, the judge found, he lied about his contacts with a Russian associate during the campaign and after the election. Prosecutors claim that the associate, Konstantin V. Kilimnik, has ties to Russian intelligence, and have been investigating whether he was involved in Russia’s covert campaign to influence the election results.The judge also found that Mr. Manafort had lied about a payment that was routed through a pro-Trump political action committee to cover his legal bills, and about information relevant to another undisclosed investigation underway at the Justice Department.Mr. Manafort joins a string of former Trump aides who have been found to have lied to federal investigators about their involvement with Russians or their intermediaries, including Michael T. Flynn, Mr. Trump’s first national security adviser; George Papadopoulos, a former campaign adviser; and Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s longtime fixer and lawyer.Judge Jackson decided that prosecutors failed to prove that Mr. Manafort, 69, had deceived them about two other matters: Mr. Kilimnik’s role in a conspiracy with Mr. Manafort to obstruct justice, and whether Mr. Manafort had been in contact with Trump administration officials.Although the defense won on those points, the judge’s split decision bodes poorly for Mr. Manafort. The ruling decreases any chance that Judge Jackson will show Mr. Manafort leniency, although legal experts have said that sentencing guidelines already made that highly unlikely. It could also affect the severity of his punishment in a case tried in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., over the summer. He was convicted by a jury there in August for tax evasion, bank fraud and other crimes.Prosecutors had declared in November that Mr. Manafort had breached his plea agreement by lying, relieving them of any obligation to suggest a lighter sentence because of his plea and cooperation. The judge found that the prosecutors had reached their conclusion in good faith, rejecting arguments by the defense that Mr. Manafort had misspoken merely because he was confused or could not remember clearly.Judge Jackson’s reasoning could become clearer in the next few days when a transcript of Wednesday’s closed hearing on the matter becomes public. But like transcripts of earlier hearings, it is likely to be heavily redacted to protect the secrecy of the special counsel’s inquiry.The prosecutors convinced Judge Jackson that Mr. Manafort had deceived them about his talks with Mr. Kilimnik, including their conversations about a possible deal that might have served the Kremlin’s ends. The two men repeatedly discussed a proposal to resolve a conflict over Russia’s incursions into Ukraine, possibly giving Moscow relief from punishing American-led sanctions that had been imposed after Russia seized Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula.Andrew Weissmann, one of Mr. Mueller’s top deputies, told the judge this month that the interactions between the two men go “to the larger view of what we think is going on and what we think is the motive here.” He suggested that Mr. Manafort had misled the prosecutors into believing that he had rejected the Ukraine plan with Mr. Kilimnik out of hand during a meeting on Aug. 2, 2016, while Mr. Manafort was still running Mr. Trump’s campaign. Only after he was confronted with evidence did Mr. Manafort acknowledge that he and Mr. Kilimnik continued to discuss the proposal on at least three other occasions after Mr. Trump was elected, he said.The prosecutors also told the judge that Mr. Manafort deceived them about transferring Trump campaign polling data to Mr. Kilimnik during the campaign. The New York Times has reported that the data included both private and public data, and that Mr. Manafort wanted the information delivered to two Ukrainian oligarchs who had financed Ukrainian political parties that were aligned with Russia.Mr. Manafort’s lawyers had suggested that Mr. Manafort had only wanted to share public data in the interest of promoting himself and maybe winning lucrative work overseas. The oligarchs and their allies had paid Mr. Manafort tens of millions of dollars in Ukraine to help Viktor F. Yanukovych win the presidency there. Mr. Yanukovych was forced out of power in a popular uprising in 2014 and fled to Russia.But the prosecutors seem to have pitted Mr. Manafort’s assertions against those of Rick Gates, Mr. Trump’s former deputy campaign chairman. Mr. Gates pleaded guilty to two felonies and has been cooperating with Mr. Mueller’s team for the past year.During the earlier hearing, Mr. Weissmann appeared to suggest that Mr. Manafort’s lies about the polling data were too important to dismiss as innocent memory lapses. Whether any Americans, wittingly or unwittingly, engaged with Russians who were trying to interfere in the presidential election went to “the core” of the special counsel’s inquiry, Mr. Weissmann said.He suggested that Mr. Manafort might have been trying to cover up the data transfer because it might hurt his chances of winning a presidential pardon for his crimes.If it became known that Mr. Manafort had given Mr. Kilimnik the campaign’s polling data, Mr. Weissmann said, it could have “negative consequences in terms of the other motive that Mr. Manafort could have, which is to at least augment his chances for a pardon.”A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Supports Prosecutors’ View That Manafort Was Lying to Inquiry. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageIn Closed Hearing, a Clue About ‘the Heart’ of Mueller’s Russia InquiryFeb. 10, 2019ImageProsecutors Told Judge That Manafort Might Have Lied in Hopes of a PardonFeb. 7, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsTrump Says He Is Not a Target in Investigations, but the Question Is Complicated - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Trump Says He Is Not a Target in Investigations, but the Question Is ComplicatedAdvertisementSupported byTrump Says He Is Not a Target in Investigations, but the Question Is ComplicatedImagePresident Trump said that Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, told him he is not a target of the Mueller investigation.CreditCreditPablo Martinez Monsivais/Associated PressBy Katie BennerFeb. 1, 2019WASHINGTON — President Trump’s assertion that a senior law enforcement official privately gave assurances that he is not under scrutiny in the investigations shadowing him partly served as a defense strategy but also raised new questions about how the Justice Department is conducting the inquiries.Mr. Trump said in an interview on Thursday with The New York Times that the deputy attorney general, Rod J. Rosenstein, has told him that he was not a target of the special counsel investigation into Russia’s election interference and whether any Trump associates conspired with it. “Rod told me I’m not a target of the investigation,” he said. The president also said that Mr. Rosenstein reiterated the statement to his personal lawyers “a number of times,” but did not say when.Questions about how law enforcement officials are navigating the inquiry have hung over the Justice Department since a separate investigation came into view in April, when F.B.I. agents raided the office, home and hotel room of Mr. Trump’s former longtime lawyer and fixer, Michael D. Cohen. The raids prompted Mr. Trump to increase his attacks on the Justice Department, raising fears among Democrats that he might shut down that inquiry or the one by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.But Mr. Rosenstein told the president shortly after the raid that he was not a target in either investigation, according to a Bloomberg News report citing unnamed people familiar with the matter, which prompted speculation that Mr. Rosenstein was trying to placate the president to allow the investigations to continue. People close to Mr. Trump’s legal team confirmed that account.Spokespeople for the Justice Department, the United States attorney in Manhattan and the special counsel all declined to comment on Friday on Mr. Trump’s statements.What do we know about Trump’s status in the investigations?Mr. Trump was considered a subject in the Cohen inquiry, according to court filings. A subject is someone whose conduct is “within the scope of the grand jury’s investigation,” according to the United States attorneys’ manual, the guidebook for federal prosecutors. It does not mean that the person is suspected of breaking the law, but that prosecutors want to learn more to determine whether a crime has been committed.In a December sentencing memo, prosecutors said that Mr. Cohen made hush payments to women who claimed to have had affairs with the president “at the direction of” Mr. Trump, whom they referred to as “Individual 1.”Prosecutors sometimes tell people involved in an investigation, like when they are being interviewed, that they are neither a subject nor a target — a more serious designation that means prosecutors have gathered substantial evidence that the person committed a crime.But prosecutors are not supposed to tell people that they are not the targets or subjects of an investigation if indeed they are. Whether or not someone falls into these categories “is not fixed,” said Matthew Axelrod, a former Justice Department official and a lawyer at Linklaters. “People can move between them as an investigation proceeds and evidence develops.”That suggests a few possibilities about what Mr. Rosenstein said. Mr. Trump and his lawyers could have misinterpreted or misrepresented Mr. Rosenstein’s comments. The president could have also become a subject in the Cohen inquiry after Mr. Rosenstein made his reassurances to Mr. Trump and his lawyers, and they could be operating off outdated information.What did we learn about how Trump views the investigations?Mr. Trump has seemed at times consumed with the investigations, attacking them for years on Twitter and deriding the Russia inquiry as a “witch hunt.” He pressed James B. Comey when he was the F.B.I. director to publicly say he was not a target in an investigation.In early 2018, Mr. Mueller’s office told Mr. Trump that he was not a target in the investigation, according to a person close to the president’s legal team.If Mr. Rosenstein, whose office has overseen the Russia and Cohen investigations, also privately told the president as much, it would have bolstered Mr. Trump’s sense that he was being unfairly targeted.But it may have also helped to prevent Mr. Trump from trying to end the Mueller inquiry, which he has said he could do. And it may have helped Mr. Rosenstein keep his job after it became public in September that he had suggested taping his conversations with Mr. Trump and possibly invoking the 25th Amendment to remove him from office.What are the implications for Mr. Trump if he is not a target of either investigation?If Mr. Trump was told that he was neither subject nor target of those investigations, it essentially signaled at the time that he was safe from prosecution and that his conduct was not within the scope of a grand jury investigation.But those designations can change at any time, and Mr. Trump did not say when Mr. Rosenstein last told his legal team that he was not a target.There are also several reasons Mr. Trump might not be a target, said Joyce Vance, a former United States attorney in Alabama. The evidence might not be there to show that he crossed the line into activity defined as criminal by law. “He also might not be a target because there is a policy that you can’t indict a sitting president,” Ms. Vance said. Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: President Says He’s Not the Target, but It’s Not That Simple. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageTrump, in Interview, Calls Wall Talks ‘Waste of Time’ and Dismisses InvestigationsJan. 31, 2019ImageExcerpts From Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesFeb. 1, 2019ImageRod Rosenstein Suggested Secretly Recording Trump and Discussed 25th AmendmentSept. 21, 2018ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsProsecutors Told Judge That Manafort Might Have Lied in Hopes of a Pardon - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Prosecutors Told Judge That Manafort Might Have Lied in Hopes of a PardonAdvertisementSupported byProsecutors Told Judge That Manafort Might Have Lied in Hopes of a PardonImageAndrew Weissmann, far left, and Greg Andres, center, lawyers on the team for the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, leaving a sealed hearing in Washington in 2017.CreditCreditAl Drago for The New York TimesBy Sharon LaFraniereFeb. 7, 2019WASHINGTON — Federal prosecutors told a judge this week that Paul Manafort, President Trump’s former campaign chairman, might have lied to them about “an extremely sensitive issue” in hopes of increasing the chances that he would be pardoned for his crimes, according to a transcript of the hearing unsealed Thursday.The heavily redacted document leaves unclear what issue Mr. Manafort was being questioned about. Prosecutors working for the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, are accusing Mr. Manafort of lying to them repeatedly last year after he agreed to cooperate with their investigation of Russian interference in the 2016 presidential race and the Trump campaign in exchange for a possibly lighter sentence.The discussion of whether Mr. Manafort could have been angling for a presidential pardon came during a closed session Monday in Federal District Court in Washington before Judge Amy Berman Jackson. Judge Jackson is exploring the prosecution’s claims that Mr. Manafort lied before she sentences Mr. Manafort for two felonies to which he pleaded guilty in her court.During the hearing, the prosecutors also detailed how they believed Mr. Manafort deceived them about his contacts with Konstantin V. Kilimnik, a longtime business partner in Ukraine who prosecutors say has contacts with Russian intelligence.One meeting between Mr. Manafort and Mr. Kilimnik in New York after Mr. Trump had won the Republican presidential nomination “goes, I think, very much to the heart of what the special counsel’s office is investigating,” said Andrew Weissmann, a prosecutor on Mr. Mueller’s team.The prosecution’s statement about a potential pardon was misattributed in the transcript to a lawyer for Mr. Manafort, Richard Westling, but was actually made by Mr. Weissmann, according to a spokesman for the special counsel.Mr. Weissmann said that Mr. Manafort could have been worried that if he spoke truthfully, it might have “negative consequences in terms of the other motive that Mr. Manafort could have, which is to at least augment his chances for a pardon.”Another prosecutor, Greg D. Andres, told the judge that the special counsel’s office was concerned that Mr. Manafort was misleading them about his contacts with administration officials because at the same time Mr. Manafort was cooperating with the prosecutors, he was sharing information about the special counsel’s investigation.Under a joint defense agreement among a number of people being scrutinized in the Mueller inquiry, one of Mr. Manafort’s lawyers, Kevin Downing, periodically briefed the president’s legal team on Mr. Manafort’s discussions with the prosecutors and F.B.I. agents.“You see Mr. Manafort changing his story so as not to implicate” others, Mr. Andres told the judge. Mr. Weissmann said that in several instances, Mr. Manafort “went out of his way” to withhold evidence that could have been used against Mr. Kilimnik.Mr. Manafort’s lawyers have argued that Mr. Manafort never deliberately lied, but only inadvertently misstated certain facts. In at least one case, Judge Jackson seemed sympathetic to that argument. She pointed out that Mr. Manafort had corrected himself in the very same session, asking, “Why would this be something that we would characterize as the crime of making an intentionally false statement?”But the judge seemed to consider other statements by Mr. Manafort to be more seriously misleading. And the prosecutors argued that Mr. Manafort’s misstatements were not minor at all, but had bearing on continuing criminal investigations.They said that Mr. Manafort had tried to obfuscate the truth about his use of $125,000 from a pro-Trump political action committee to pay his legal bills. At the time, he was facing criminal investigations that ultimately led to his conviction for 10 felonies, including tax fraud, bank fraud and conspiracy. Mr. Weissmann described that arrangement as “to put it charitably, a scheme,” and that Mr. Manafort lied to hide knowledge of it.He stressed that information about that element of the case, apparently involving suspected kickbacks from the political action committee, was being kept secret — a hint that a criminal inquiry is continuing.The prosecutors also suggested that they are continuing to look into Mr. Manafort’s dealings with Mr. Kilimnik. Mr. Manafort and Mr. Kilimnik maintained ties both during the five months that Mr. Manafort worked for Mr. Trump’s campaign and after Mr. Manafort was fired as campaign chairman in August 2016, prosecutors said.The special counsel’s office is claiming that Mr. Manafort lied about the number of times that he and Mr. Kilimnik discussed a plan that apparently would have eased American-led sanctions against Russia in exchange for certain concessions that Russia would make regarding Ukraine. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine provoked the imposition of sanctions that the Kremlin wants lifted.In what appears to be a reference to the peace plan, the transcript states that Mr. Manafort and Mr. Kilimnik discussed the issue at least five times: in August 2016, in December 2016, during the inauguration week of January 2017, in February 2017 and during winter 2018. Mr. Downing told Judge Jackson that documents that prosecutors had produced detailing communications with Mr. Kilimnik were “nonsense” because whether or not Mr. Trump was elected, “the sanctions were going to continue against Russia.”But Mr. Weissmann said the Aug. 2, 2016, meeting was highly unusual given that Mr. Manafort was then busy running Mr. Trump’s campaign. “That meeting and what happened at that meeting is of significance to the special counsel,” he said.Joining Mr. Manafort and Mr. Kilimnik that day at the Grand Havana club in Manhattan was Rick Gates, deputy chairman of the Trump campaign and Mr. Manafort’s longtime right-hand man. The three men apparently considered the get-together to be sensitive. When the meeting broke up, prosecutors said, Mr. Manafort “took the precaution” of leaving with Mr. Gates through a separate door than Mr. Kilimnik.The transcript makes clear that Mr. Gates, who pleaded guilty to two felonies and has been cooperating with prosecutors for a year, was a key source of information about Mr. Manafort, Mr. Kilimnik and other issues central to their inquiry.For instance, it was apparently Mr. Gates who revealed to prosecutors that Mr. Manafort had ordered Trump campaign polling data to be sent to Mr. Kilimnik as Mr. Trump was clinching the Republican nomination in spring 2016. The New York Times has reported that Mr. Manafort wanted Mr. Kilimnik to pass the data to two oligarchs who had financed Ukrainian political parties aligned with Russia.Prosecutors said Mr. Manafort lied about the data transfer even though he had access to reports of the F.B.I.’s interviews and was “very well aware of what Mr. Gates had said about sharing of polling data.”Mr. Downing suggested that the special counsel’s office was not nearly skeptical enough of Mr. Gates, who is awaiting sentencing for conspiracy and lying to the federal authorities. If the judge decides that Mr. Manafort lied based on what Mr. Gates has said, Mr. Downing said, “We would really have grave concerns.”But Judge Jackson cited corroboration for Mr. Gates’s statements about Mr. Manafort. She also said the fact that Mr. Gates had previously been caught lying did not mean that “not one word he said to the Office of Special Counsel was true.”Kenneth P. Vogel contributed reporting. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: Manafort May Have Lied For Possibility of a Pardon. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageManafort’s Lawyers Say Prosecutors Twisted Memory Lapses as LiesJan. 23, 2019ImageLaw Firm to Pay $4.6 Million in Case Tied to Manafort and UkraineJan. 17, 2019ImageFirms Recruited by Paul Manafort Are Investigated Over Foreign PaymentsFeb. 5, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsBarr Clears Key Hurdle for Confirmation as Attorney General - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Barr Clears Key Hurdle for Confirmation as Attorney GeneralAdvertisementSupported byBarr Clears Key Hurdle for Confirmation as Attorney GeneralImageWilliam P. Barr is expected to be confirmed as attorney general this week.CreditCreditSarah Silbiger/The New York TimesBy Nicholas Fandos and Charlie SavageFeb. 12, 2019WASHINGTON — William P. Barr on Tuesday cleared a crucial hurdle for his nomination as attorney general, virtually assuring his confirmation this week to take over the Justice Department — and oversee the investigation into links between the Trump campaign and Russia’s election-manipulation operations.The Senate voted largely along party lines, 55 to 44, to limit debate on Mr. Barr’s nomination and move to a final up-or-down vote, likely on Thursday. It signals that he has enough support in the Republican-controlled chamber to prevail.“When it comes to Bill Barr, I can only tell my Democratic colleagues, there is nobody better I know to recommend to you,” said Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, the Republican chairman of the Judiciary Committee, ticking through Mr. Barr’s record on the Senate floor shortly after the vote.A handful of senators broke ranks, however. Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, a libertarian-leaning Republican who had expressed concerns about Mr. Barr’s sweeping view of executive power, voted against him. But Senators Doug Jones of Alabama, Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, and Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, Democrats who represent conservative or swing states, voted for him.The fight over Mr. Barr’s nomination has centered on demands by Democrats that he pledge to make public any final report by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, describing the findings of his investigation, which is believed to be nearing an end. Mr. Barr pledged to be as transparent as possible, but he also said that he could not make any commitments, both because such a report might contain some information that must remain secret, such as grand-jury testimony, and because he did not know what Mr. Mueller might produce.In defending that stance, Mr. Barr promised to obey Justice Department regulations for special counsel investigations, created by the Clinton administration in 1999 after the independent counsel at the time, Ken Starr, produced a lengthy and salacious report about President Bill Clinton’s affair with Monica Lewinsky. Those rules do not envision a lengthy report going directly from the investigator to Congress and the public. Rather, they envision a report to the attorney general, who then sends a separate notification to Congress explaining that the investigation has ended.Republicans said they trusted Mr. Barr to keep his word and protect the investigation.“I can promise you this, Mr. Barr will make sure Mr. Mueller can finish his job without political interference,” Mr. Graham said. “He said that. I believe that. And that’s how this movie has to end.”Democrats at Mr. Barr’s confirmation hearing were not satisfied with his evasions, though, and the Senate Judiciary Committee vote to send his nomination to the floor last week fell along partisan lines. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, has also criticized Mr. Barr’s stance about the same issue, contributing to Democrats’ show of opposition to his confirmation in the cloture vote.“He is another person who is going to be very loyal to the president,” Senator Mazie K. Hirono, Democrat of Hawaii and a member of the Judiciary Committee who voted no, said in an interview. “He is a supporter of what is known as a unitary president, which is a president with a lot of powers, and we hardly need to give this president more powers than he already thinks he has.”Nevertheless, Mr. Barr is virtually certain to be confirmed. That would bring him back for a rare second stint in the same cabinet-level position that he held in a previous era. Mr. Barr served as attorney general from 1991 to 1993, under President George Bush, before spending the last quarter-century as a corporate lawyer — much of it with the telecommunications company that became Verizon.It would also end a turbulent chapter in the history of the Justice Department that traces back to the decision by Mr. Trump’s first attorney general, Jeff Sessions, to recuse himself from overseeing the Russia investigation, leaving the deputy attorney general, Rod J. Rosenstein, as acting head of the department for the purpose of that investigation.Mr. Rosenstein appointed Mr. Mueller as special counsel and protected the investigation from interference, even as Mr. Trump raged at the Justice Department and repeatedly lashed out at Mr. Sessions for what he viewed as a betrayal. That tension reached a crescendo in November, the day after Democrats’ victories in the 2018 midterm election, when Mr. Trump ousted Mr. Sessions.Breaking with the normal order of succession for the Justice Department, Mr. Trump then installed as acting attorney general, Matthew G. Whitaker, a White House loyalist with ties to a company that had been shut down for fraud. Democrats were deeply suspicious of Mr. Whitaker, who had openly denigrated the Mueller investigation and unsuccessfully interviewed in 2017 for the job of the chief White House lawyer charged with defending against it. Many saw his appointment as illegitimate.Their criticism surged when Mr. Whitaker rejected the advice of career department ethics lawyers that he, too, recuse himself from overseeing the Russia investigation. At a House Judiciary Committee hearing last week, Mr. Whitaker testified that he had told Mr. Trump’s circle none of the information he received in briefings, and said he had taken no steps to interfere with Mr. Mueller’s work.Meanwhile, Mr. Trump nominated Mr. Barr, who was known during the first Bush administration for his unusually strong interpretation of the presidency’s executive powers. That choice also attracted intense scrutiny. Among other things, Mr. Barr had publicly declared in 2017 that he saw more reason to investigate Hillary Clinton over a conservative conspiracy theory involving a uranium deal the Obama administration had approved while she was secretary of state than to investigate any collusion between the Trump campaign and Russia.It also emerged that in June 2018, he had taken it upon himself to write a lengthy legal memo for the Trump administration, which he also shared with Mr. Trump’s outside legal team, arguing that Mr. Trump wielded unchecked power to “start or stop a law enforcement proceeding” and so Mr. Mueller should therefore not be permitted to investigate whether Mr. Trump committed obstruction of justice for pressuring the former F.B.I. director, James B. Comey Jr., to drop an investigation into a top aide.But at his confirmation hearing in January, Mr. Barr walked back or qualified some of his early writings on executive power, putting greater emphasis on the Justice Department’s independence and legal limits on the presidency. And he vowed to let Mr. Mueller finish his work, saying he would resist any effort to fire him without good cause. Follow Nicholas Fandos and Charlie Savage on Twitter: @npfandos and @charlie_savage.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Attorney General Nominee Is Likely to Be Confirmed, Senate Vote Shows. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageWilliam Barr Vows to Let Mueller Finish InvestigationJan. 15, 2019ImageA Memo and a Recusal Decision Underscore Potential Threats to the Mueller InquiryDec. 20, 2018ImageTrump Says He Alone Can Do It. His Attorney General Nominee Usually Agrees.Jan. 14, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsA Divided Senate Committee Advances William Barr Nomination - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|A Divided Senate Committee Advances William Barr NominationAdvertisementSupported byA Divided Senate Committee Advances William Barr NominationVideoThe Senate Judiciary Committee voted on Thursday along party lines to advance William P. Barr’s nomination to be President Trump’s attorney general.CreditCreditSarah Silbiger/The New York TimesBy Nicholas FandosFeb. 7, 2019WASHINGTON — A polarized Senate Judiciary Committee advanced the nomination of William P. Barr to be President Trump’s second confirmed attorney general on Thursday, as Republicans and Democrats split over his views on executive authority and the special counsel’s ongoing Russia investigation.Mr. Barr will now go before the full Republican-controlled Senate, where he is expected to be confirmed and sworn into office as soon as next week. If confirmed, he would promptly assume responsibility for the special counsel investigation led by Robert S. Mueller III into possible ties between Mr. Trump, his associates and Russia, and whether the president obstructed justice.Mr. Barr will get at least one Democratic vote in the full Senate. Senator Doug Jones, Democrat of Alabama, announced his support on Thursday.But the committee’s debate and subsequent 12-10 party-line vote to effectively endorse Mr. Barr to the full Senate revealed how fraught the politics around the Justice Department have become after two years of unrelenting attacks by Mr. Trump.Even so, many Democrats are privately eager for Mr. Barr to be confirmed, believing that he would be a vast improvement over Matthew G. Whitaker, the current acting attorney general who is relatively inexperienced and fiercely loyal to Mr. Trump.Mr. Whitaker was scheduled to testify on Friday before the House Judiciary Committee, but on Thursday, he said he will not appear before Congress unless the committee assures him he will not be subpoenaed. The House committee voted along party lines on Wednesday to prepare just such a subpoena in case Mr. Whitaker backed out.Mr. Barr, who previously served as attorney general in the 1990s, presented himself in his confirmation hearing last month as a set of steady hands who would guard the department’s independence. He said he would permit Mr. Mueller to finish his work, and he pledged to allow as much transparency as possible around the investigation’s findings.Republicans signaled that they were broadly satisfied with Mr. Barr’s word, and Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, the committee’s chairman, opened the hearing by saying that “the time has come for new leadership at the department.”But Democrats, at least those on the committee, remain deeply mistrustful that Mr. Barr’s public statements left him a dangerous amount of discretion to curtail the investigation or suppress its findings if so ordered. They did not question his qualifications.ImageSenator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, the committee’s chairman, opened the hearing by saying that “the time has come for new leadership at the department.”CreditPete Marovich for The New York Times“This is not the time to install an attorney general who has repeatedly espoused a view of unfettered executive power,” said Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, summarizing the heart of her party’s objections.If confirmed, Mr. Barr, 68, would join only a handful of Americans to return to the same high-level government post in which they already served. Under President George H.W. Bush, he served as the head of the department’s Office of Legal Counsel, then as deputy attorney general and ultimately attorney general from 1991 to 1993. He enjoyed bipartisan support during his earlier tenure, but advanced an unusually expansive view of executive powers that, reconsidered in light of Mr. Trump’s unorthodox presidency, has fueled Democrats concerns about Mr. Barr’s independence from the current president.A 2018 memorandum drafted by Mr. Barr in which he strongly criticized one of Mr. Mueller’s main lines of inquiry — whether Mr. Trump had obstructed justice — became the focus of Democratic concerns. Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, the panel’s top Democrat, called it “disqualifying.”Mr. Barr downplayed his views in a confirmation hearing last month, telling senators he would refuse any order from the president to fire Mr. Mueller without good cause.“I am in a position in life where I can provide the leadership necessary to protect the independence and reputation of the department,” he said.Mr. Barr said that he expected the attorney general would receive Mr. Mueller’s findings, likely in the form of a report, and then produce his own report to Congress based on the material. If he was that attorney general, he said he would strive for transparency, though would not guarantee he would share the findings in full.Republicans and Democrats continued to debate the efficacy of those pledges on Thursday, largely ignoring the nominee’s views on policy matters unrelated to the Russia investigation.“I have to say that former attorney general Barr’s toplines on this issue were terrific,” said Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island. “But once you got down below the towline, once you got into the weeds,” his views suggest he would be willing to suppress Mr. Mueller’s findings if ordered to do so by the White House.Mr. Graham retorted that Mr. Barr had promised him “he would not allow executive privilege to be used as a reason to cover up wrongdoing.”“I will hold him that,” he added. Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsOpinion | Why Pick Manafort? - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperOpinion|Why Pick Manafort?AdvertisementOpinionSupported byletterWhy Pick Manafort?A reader raises a question derived from the Mueller investigation.Feb. 13, 2019ImagePaul Manafort, the Trump campaign chairman at the time, preparing for an interview ahead of the Republican National Convention in July 2016.CreditCreditSam Hodgson for The New York TimesTo the Editor:Re “In Cryptic Hint, Mueller’s Team Tips Its Hand” (front page, Feb. 11):A question I’ve never seen anybody ask: Why would an American running for president of the United States pick Paul Manafort as his campaign manager — unless the intent all along was to make use of his Ukrainian and Russian connections?Peter JefferySouth Bend, Ind.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A26 of the New York edition with the headline: Why Pick Manafort?. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsTrump Inaugural Committee Ordered to Hand Over Documents to Federal Investigators - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Trump Inaugural Committee Ordered to Hand Over Documents to Federal InvestigatorsAdvertisementSupported byTrump Inaugural Committee Ordered to Hand Over Documents to Federal InvestigatorsImageFederal prosecutors are investigating the activities of President Trump’s inaugural committee.CreditCreditDoug Mills/The New York TimesBy Maggie Haberman and Ben ProtessFeb. 4, 2019Escalating one of the investigations into President Trump’s inaugural committee, federal prosecutors ordered on Monday that its officials turn over documents about donors, finances and activities, according to two people familiar with the inquiry.The subpoena seeks documents related to all of the committee’s donors and guests; any benefits handed out, including tickets and photo opportunities with the president; federal disclosure filings; vendors; contracts; and more, one of the people said.The new requests expand an investigation prosecutors opened late last year amid a flurry of scrutiny of the inaugural committee. And they showed that the investigations surrounding Mr. Trump, once centered on potential ties to Russia during the 2016 presidential election, have spread far beyond the special counsel’s office to include virtually all aspects of his adult life: his business, his campaign, his inauguration and his presidency.In the subpoena, investigators also showed interest in whether any foreigners illegally donated to the committee, as well as whether committee staff members knew that such donations were illegal, asking for documents laying out legal requirements for donations. Federal law prohibits foreign contributions to federal campaigns, political action committees and inaugural funds.Prosecutors also requested all documents related to vendors and contractors with the inaugural committee, which raised a record $107 million and spent lavishly.People familiar with the subpoena said prosecutors are interested in potential money laundering as well as election fraud, though it is possible that the prosecutors do not suspect the inaugural committee of such violations. The prosecutors cited those crimes in the subpoena simply as justification for their demand for documents, the people said.Only one individual was named as part of the subpoena’s demand for documents: Imaad Zuberi, a former fund-raiser for President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton who was seeking inroads with Mr. Trump, and whose company, Avenue Ventures, gave $900,000 to the inaugural committee. The subpoena also seeks documents related to his company.[Read more about the amount spent on President Trump’s inauguration in 2017.]A spokesman, Steve Rabinowitz, said Mr. Zuberi was unaware of having been named in the subpoena, and noted that he gave “generously and directly” to the inaugural committee, along with many others who donated more.Another entity that the subpoena seeks documents on is Stripe, which created technology to help process credit card transactions. According to published reports, the company counts Josh Kushner, the brother of Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, among its investors. Josh Kushner is not named in the subpoena, and a spokesman for him declined to comment.A spokesman for the inaugural committee said it was still reviewing the subpoena and intended to cooperate with the investigation. A spokesman for the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan declined to comment. ABC first reported that a subpoena was in the works.Prosecutors have pursued the possibility that the inaugural committee made false statements to the Federal Election Commission, according to people familiar with the matter. It can be a crime to knowingly make false or fraudulent statements to a federal agency.The inaugural committee disclosed a list of its donors to the commission, and the prosecutors are examining whether that list is complete and accurate, the person said. If a donor was omitted from the report, prosecutors could take an interest in that, as well.The inaugural committee’s chairman was Thomas J. Barrack, a close friend of the president’s. Mr. Barrack’s close aide working on the committee was Rick Gates, the former deputy to Paul Manafort, the former Trump campaign chairman who has been convicted of and pleaded guilty to several crimes in connection with the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. Mr. Gates has pleaded guilty to financial fraud and lying to the F.B.I., and has been cooperating with Mr. Mueller’s team for nearly a year.No one who worked for the committee has been accused of wrongdoing, and a subpoena is an initial step in the inquiry. Mr. Barrack and other inaugural committee officials are not named in it.The United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn is separately investigating whether inaugural officials helped foreigners illegally funnel donations to Mr. Trump’s inaugural committee using so-called straw donors to disguise their donations, people briefed on that inquiry said.As part of their own inquiry, the prosecutors in Manhattan are questioning whether foreign nationals illegally donated to Mr. Trump’s inaugural committee.The Manhattan investigation into the inaugural committee grew out of the investigation into Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s former personal lawyer and fixer. Mr. Cohen’s case was a referral from Mr. Mueller’s team to Manhattan federal prosecutors.Mr. Cohen is due to begin a prison sentence next month after pleading guilty last year to a range of crimes, including one campaign finance-related charge in which he implicated the president.Mr. Cohen has spent more than 70 hours with investigators with the Manhattan prosecutors and Mr. Mueller’s team.In raids of Mr. Cohen’s office, home and hotel room in April, F.B.I. agents seized his cellphones, which included many dozens of voice recordings, mostly voice mail messages, according to people briefed on the seized material. On one recording, Mr. Trump spoke to Mr. Cohen about a payment to a woman who had claimed to have had an affair with Mr. Trump, which he has denied.On another, Mr. Cohen spoke to Stephanie Winston Wolkoff, who was a top official on the inaugural committee. Ms. Winston Wolkoff was fired as an adviser to the first lady, Melania Trump, in early 2018, after the committee released its financial disclosures showing that entities controlled by Ms. Winston Wolkoff were paid $26 million. The vast majority of those funds went to a subcontractor.Ms. Winston Wolkoff’s company made a $1.6 million commission from that $26 million, which officials have previously said went to pay 14 people. Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Federal Inquiry Wants Records For Inaugural. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageTrump Inaugural Fund and Super PAC Said to Be Scrutinized for Illegal Foreign DonationsDec. 13, 2018ImageAt Trump’s Inauguration, $10,000 for Makeup and Lots of Room ServiceJan. 14, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsHouse Judiciary Committee Hires Trump Legal Critics for Investigations - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|House Judiciary Committee Hires Trump Legal Critics for InvestigationsAdvertisementSupported byHouse Judiciary Committee Hires Trump Legal Critics for InvestigationsImageRepresentative Jerrold Nadler, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, has not committed to opening a formal impeachment inquiry.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesBy Nicholas FandosFeb. 12, 2019WASHINGTON — Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee said on Tuesday that they had retained two elite white-collar litigators and prominent legal critics of President Trump to help begin inquiries into some of the most sensitive allegations involving the president, including ethics violations, corruption and possible obstruction of justice.The committee’s chairman, Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York, has not committed to opening a formal impeachment inquiry. But the addition of the two lawyers, Norman L. Eisen and Barry H. Berke, indicates that the Democrats do not intend to wait for the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, to finish his work to begin weighing issues that could ultimately be wrapped up in such a proceeding.“The president of the United States faces numerous allegations of corruption and obstruction,” Mr. Nadler said in a statement announcing the decision. “His conduct and crude statements threaten the basic legal, ethical and constitutional norms that maintain our democratic institutions. Congress has a constitutional duty to be a check and balance against abuses of power when necessary.”Mr. Nadler gave little detail about those inquiries in his statement, saying that Mr. Eisen and Mr. Berke would consult on matters “related to the Department of Justice, including the department’s review of Special Counsel Mueller’s investigation.” A Judiciary Committee official, who was not authorized to discuss the appointments publicly, said that Democrats would be making public more detailed plans in the coming weeks.Retaining two counsels of Mr. Eisen and Mr. Berke’s caliber is relatively unusual for a congressional committee, and it underscores the new legal and political jeopardy the president faces in a House controlled by Democrats. Just in the last week, Democrats in the chamber have begun laying the groundwork to try to obtain Mr. Trump’s long-concealed tax returns and restarted a broad investigation into his ties not only to Russia but also to other foreign entities that could have financial or other leverage over the president or his associates.Investigators in each inquiry will have the power to call witnesses, demand documents and issue subpoenas to compel evidence — treatment Mr. Trump has already branded “presidential harassment.”Mr. Eisen served as the top White House ethics lawyer under President Barack Obama and later as his ambassador to the Czech Republic. A former white-collar litigator and investigator, he has emerged since Mr. Trump’s election as one of the president’s most recognizable legal critics, using his perch as chairman of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington and a contributor position at CNN to comment voluminously about what he has argued are ethical lapses and instances of outright corruption in the president’s administration.Mr. Eisen also serves as a co-counsel in a lawsuit accusing Mr. Trump of violating the emoluments clause of the Constitution by refusing to divorce himself from his businesses, and thus reaping financial benefits from foreign agents.Mr. Berke, a partner at the New York firm Kramer Levin, is less well known in Washington but brings deep connections to the New York legal world, including the federal prosecutors there investigating Mr. Trump’s campaign and inaugural committee. His practice primarily deals with complicated financial and tax crimes, though he has written with Mr. Eisen about obstruction of justice and the president’s other legal vulnerabilities.Mr. Berke represented Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York in a federal investigation into the mayor’s campaign fund-raising, which concluded in 2017 without charges being filed.Mr. Eisen resigned from most of his other obligations on Tuesday, and he is expected to drop his role in the emoluments case. Mr. Berke will remain a partner at his firm but spend most of his time working with the Judiciary Committee.As House committees begin the array of new inquiries, the Judiciary Committee is likely to emerge as a crucial arbiter of Mr. Trump’s political fortunes. It has oversight of the Justice Department and the F.B.I., and has traditionally been the venue where impeachment proceedings begin.Despite considerable pressure from his left flank, Mr. Nadler has thus far approached the impeachment question cautiously, saying repeatedly that he does not yet see a case and wants to wait for Mr. Mueller to finish his work before proceeding to any formal deliberations.But he has made some of his views clear.In recent weeks, Mr. Nadler has said publicly that he believes Mr. Trump “has engaged in a long pattern of obstruction” and views his attacks on federal law enforcement as an existential threat to those institutions.Mr. Nadler has said that he also plans to investigate Mr. Trump’s role in hush-money payments made shortly before Election Day in 2016 to two women who said they had affairs with Mr. Trump — circumstances that, if true, he said would most likely meet the criteria for an impeachable offense. The president’s former personal lawyer, Michael D. Cohen, implicated Mr. Trump in those payments in court last year as he pleaded guilty to campaign finance and other violations.Mr. Eisen and Mr. Berke, together with Noah Bookbinder, the executive director of CREW, have written a series of reports and opinion articles on obstruction of justice, collusion and Mr. Trump for the Brookings Institution. Their most recent Brookings report on obstruction, published last August, laid out a case that Mr. Trump’s publicly known actions amounted to obstruction of justice.“Analyzing the current allegations against the president under the legal framework laid out in our original report even more strongly supports that the president obstructed justice under ordinary application of the relevant criminal law,” they wrote.“In many ways,” they added, “the question has become less about whether there is a case that Donald J. Trump obstructed justice, and more about whether and in what form the rule of law will be followed.”Representative Doug Collins of Georgia, the top Republican on the Judiciary Committee, seized on those writings in a statement on Tuesday afternoon that accused Democrats of partisan targeting of Mr. Trump. Republicans also fumed that as he added Democratic oversight firepower, Mr. Nadler refused to extend a waiver that would have allowed a former F.B.I. agent working on oversight with the committee’s Republicans to stay on the job.“Looks like Democrats are staffing up for impeachment before Mueller’s report is even out,” Mr. Collins wrote, adding a reference to a December Op-Ed article written by Mr. Berke and Mr. Eisen. “Is this the gig Berke and Eisen were auditioning for when they predicted last December the president was unlikely to have ‘a calm 2019’?”Ben Protess contributed reporting. Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Legal Critics Hired By House Judiciary Panel. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageAsked to Stop Investigations, House Digs InFeb. 6, 2019ImageDemocrats Start Investigative Gears, but SlowlyJan. 9, 2019ImageIt’s Not Just Trump in House Democrats’ Cross Hairs. His Family Is, Too.Nov. 25, 2018ImageProsecutors Effectively Accuse Trump of Defrauding Voters. What Does It Mean?Dec. 8, 2018ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsWhen Roger Stone Flashed Nixon’s ‘V-for-Victory’ - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperWhen Roger Stone Flashed Nixon’s ‘V-for-Victory’AdvertisementSupported byScreenlandWhen Roger Stone Flashed Nixon’s ‘V-for-Victory’ImageCreditCreditPhoto illustration by The New York Times; source video: ReutersBy Sam AndersonFeb. 13, 2019History tends to repeat itself, but we aren’t always obligated to listen. Only rarely is the repetition meaningful, the echoing theme of a grand fugue. More often it is just compulsive, like a little brother antagonizing his sister or a tiny dog yapping at the wind.The best thing to do, in such cases, is to ignore the irritant until it stops. Unfortunately, we do not live in a time of ignoring. We process the world, compulsively, through our pocket cameras, pinching and poking at the footage on our screens. The louder and more manipulative something is, the longer it dominates our little glass rectangles. We are fatally vulnerable to little brothers and yapping dogs — to all varieties of preening, needling, attention-mongering and weaponized self-regard.Enter Roger Stone. In normal times, Stone would be a minor historical figure — one of those names near the bottom of the list of dramatis personae, next to the guards and attendants. He would take up the tiniest microfraction of our civic bandwidth. The Republican operative holds no official governmental position and has made a name for himself mainly as a dirty trickster and an oddball popinjay — a man who raises funds by selling autographed rocks and whose inauguration outfit, complete with top hat, was so extravagant it inspired a 105-part viral Twitter thread comparing him to, among other things, “the villain in a kid’s movie that stars a talking car” and “a czarist Mr. Peanut.” Stone is a henchman’s henchman, a voice from the shadows of another era.But we do not live in normal times, and so, late last month, Roger Stone became an avatar of Breaking News. The Mueller investigation finally snatched him up: He was arrested in a predawn raid, taken to a federal court in Florida and then released on a $250,000 bond. (He would later plead not guilty to seven charges.) Cameras, naturally, sprouted on the courthouse steps, raising the possibility that Stone might rise to a whole new level of peacocking. But he shuffled out of the courthouse with an uncharacteristic lack of pomp, in a short-sleeve polo shirt, standing only half-visible in a large crowd — a man swallowed by his watchers. Half the crowd seemed to be holding up cellphones, and you could see Stone being recorded, in real time, on their screens.Instead of using this moment to do something new, Roger Stone decided to perform the past. He stretched out his arms and, on each hand, extended two fingers — replicating the most infamous gesture in American political history: Nixon’s flying double V, the official gang sign of Watergate. This was the takeaway moment, the video we all passed around and made exhausted jokes about: a bit of historical karaoke.Americans associate the V with the fall of Nixon, but its semiotic history is longer and richer. During World War II, citizens threw up Vs all over occupied territories in Europe, not only with fingers but with paint and chalk, as a symbol of unified resistance. The signal was most powerful when victory was least likely; it was an expression of embattled optimism. Winston Churchill, with his beefy face and bowler hat, flashed infinite Vs amid the wreckage of the Blitz.Two decades later, during the protracted disaster of the Vietnam War, Nixon’s habitual flashing of embattled-optimism signs felt significantly less inspiring. It was even less convincing in the wake of the Watergate investigation, when the most embattled figure of all turned out to be the president himself. His signature use of the flying-V gesture came at the moment of his ultimate defeat: standing alone atop the stairs into Marine One, surrendering to his enemies, leaving the White House for the final time. It was one of the last things we saw him do.Stone fetishizes Nixon the way a Goth kid fetishizes the Crow. He began his political career as a Nixon volunteer and is so performatively devoted to his disgraced hero that he has the man’s jowly face tattooed on his own back. This Nixon worship feels like Stone’s version of Churchillian defiance: In the face of terrible obstacles (democracy, civility, rule of law), Stone will remain nobly uncowed. Of course he would spend this moment in the spotlight doing Nixon cosplay. It was like a kid seeing himself on the Jumbotron — on some cellular level, he just has to dab.To quote something, however, is inevitably to change it. Examine clips of Nixon and Stone side by side, and it is clear that the men inhabit different worlds. Nixon stands alone above the watching crowd, and the gravity of the scene is almost unbearable; the supporters on the White House lawn look like mourners. First he waves at them, and when his Vs arrive, his hands fly out suddenly, like doves fluttering from his sleeves, and his suit jacket puckers and strains against the motion. Then he is gone.Stone’s reprise, naturally, carries much less historical weight. His gesture almost gets lost in the crowd. He has to angle his arms up very high to be seen, and instead of holding his fingers steady, as Nixon did, he waggles them around, just to make sure we all get it. Nixon looked like a pope on a balcony — elevated, isolated, imperious. Stone looks like a kid trying to get a radio signal with a tinfoil antenna. The gesture is premeditated and insistent. He actually makes it twice, first at the beginning of his appearance and then again at the end. The people around him are hardly even paying attention: They mill around, discussing other things. Even those holding up their cellphones look bored. It is a perfect little modern tableau: witnesses recording an act of desperate provocation, with limited interest themselves, mainly so they can show it to everybody else.VideoStone fetishizes Nixon the way a Goth kid fetishizes the Crow.CreditCreditReutersThis is the world our screens feed us. In hindsight, Watergate happened in a relatively stable news environment — a world in which mounting facts were taken seriously enough that the president had to resign. Americans watched him leave on network news, with its long, steady camera shots overdubbed by voice-of-God anchors. We consumed Stone’s homage, by contrast, on social media platforms and partisan news aggregators and breathless cable networks. The clip was one scrap of a Cubist collage, one rectangle among many. It jockeyed with jokes and memes, manufactured scandals and furious rants, news of new jobs and pictures of new babies. Anchors and subanchors pontificated about it atop chyrons, logos and tiny graphics showing the activity of the stock market.Nixon’s gesture was the image that defined an American moment. Stone’s was just another flicker in our self-referential chaos of information. People will read it to mean whatever they want it to mean. Surely someone, staring into a screen somewhere, must already be contemplating getting a tattoo of Stone getting his tattoo of Nixon. This is the debut of Screenland, a new column that will examine defining moments in our video-obsessed culture, from news footage to film and TV to viral sports clips and more. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 13 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Second Hand. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsAfter Heated Exchange, Matthew Whitaker Says He Will Testify Friday Before the House - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|After Heated Exchange, Matthew Whitaker Says He Will Testify Friday Before the HouseAdvertisementSupported byAfter Heated Exchange, Matthew Whitaker Says He Will Testify Friday Before the HouseImageMatthew G. Whitaker, the acting attorney general, is scheduled to testify before the House Judiciary Committee on Friday.CreditCreditSarah Silbiger/The New York TimesBy Katie Benner and Charlie SavageFeb. 7, 2019WASHINGTON — After a heated back-and-forth, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, Jerrold Nadler, bowed to the wishes of the acting attorney general, Matthew G. Whitaker, that he not issue a subpoena while Mr. Whitaker testifies before the committee as scheduled on Friday.Earlier in the day, the Justice Department sent the committee a letter demanding a commitment in writing that any subpoena not be used during the hearing, a promise that Mr. Nadler, Democrat of New York, initially would not give.[Follow our live briefing of Matthew Whitaker’s testimony.]But after negotiations that began early in the evening, the committee agreed verbally and in writing not to issue a subpoena on or before Feb. 8, according to a Justice Department spokeswoman, Kerri Kupec.“In light of that commitment, Acting Attorney General Whitaker looks forward to voluntarily appearing at tomorrow’s hearing and discussing the great work of the Department of Justice,” Ms. Kupec said.Mr. Nadler originally told Mr. Whitaker that there would be “no need” for the subpoena if he came prepared to answer questions, and that the committee was willing to work with him on a case-by-case basis on any question he felt he could not answer.He then said on Twitter that Mr. Whitaker would be joining the committee.But Mr. Nadler did not mention that he also gave Mr. Whitaker the written assurance that he sought. Representative Doug Collins, Republican of Georgia and the committee’s ranking member, later shared that letter on Twitter “confirming there would be no subpoena tomorrow.”Once given the verbal and written promise, the Justice Department told the committee that Mr. Whitaker would be at the hearing on Friday.The latest turn in the political drama started on Thursday morning, when the committee voted to give its chairman, Mr. Nadler, the authority to subpoena Mr. Whitaker if he did not answer questions during the hearing or if he chose not to show up.Democrats want to ask Mr. Whitaker about matters related to the Russia investigation led by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, and whether Mr. Trump replaced Attorney General Jeff Sessions with Mr. Whitaker to interfere with that inquiry. Some Democrats consider Mr. Whitaker’s appointment to be illegitimate.“I hope not to have to use the subpoena,” Mr. Nadler said on Thursday. “Unfortunately, a series of troubling events over the last few months suggest that we should be prepared.”While Mr. Whitaker had agreed to testify voluntarily, the potential that Mr. Nadler could subpoena him in the middle of the hearing was essentially a threat to initiate contempt-of-Congress proceedings if Mr. Whitaker refused to answer questions without a legal right to balk.On Thursday afternoon, the Justice Department demanded that Mr. Nadler not use that power during the hearing.“We seek a written assurance from your office that the committee will not issue a subpoena to the acting attorney general on or before Feb. 8,” the department wrote, “and that the committee will engage in good-faith negotiations with the department before issuing such a subpoena.”The letter raised the possibility that Mr. Whitaker might not testify before William P. Barr is confirmed as the next attorney general. The Senate Judiciary Committee voted along party lines on Thursday to send Mr. Barr’s nomination to the full Senate.During the first two years of the Trump administration, when Democrats were in the minority, they bristled when
officials like Mr. Sessions refused to answer their questions about communications with the president on the grounds that Mr. Trump might, in the future, want to invoke executive privilege over them — even though Mr. Trump never actually did so.Executive privilege is a power that presidents have claimed under the Constitution to prevent Congress from gaining access to internal executive branch information, like confidential communications between the president and his advisers. But such information is not legally shielded from Congress by default; rather, the president is supposed to choose whether to invoke executive privilege in any particular instance — at the cost of accepting any political fire for keeping that information secret.With Democrats now in control of the House, Mr. Nadler is trying to avoid such stonewalling.On Jan. 22, Mr. Nadler sent Mr. Whitaker a letter outlining questions that Democrats might ask him about his conversations with Mr. Trump and asked him to consult the White House ahead of time about whether Mr. Trump would invoke the privilege over them. Absent such an invocation, Mr. Nadler wrote that the committee would otherwise expect answers at the hearing.If a witness refuses to answer a question during a congressional hearing without a legal right to do so, the House can vote to hold him in contempt. Congress can then ask the Justice Department to prosecute him or file a lawsuit asking a judge to order the witness to provide the information, raising the further possibility of being imprisoned for contempt of court. But a valid assertion of executive privilege would provide a lawful basis for declining to answer.In 2012, Eric H. Holder Jr. was the first attorney general to be held in contempt of Congress for refusing to comply with a subpoena for information. Justice Department officials then declined to prosecute Mr. Holder, saying they had the discretion to not prosecute an executive branch official who claims executive privilege.But the Justice Department has long considered a subpoena to be a necessary precursor to Congress holding an executive branch official in contempt. Its letter to Mr. Nadler demanding that he agree not to issue the subpoena during the hearing, therefore, amounted to a demand that he not initiate contempt proceedings against Mr. Whitaker during the hearing and instead commit to negotiating over any disputed information afterward, once any questions have actually been asked.“We cannot understand this measure other than as an attempt to circumvent the constitutionally required accommodation process and thereby to transform the hearing into a public spectacle,” the department’s letter said.The letter also noted that previous executive branch officials of both parties have declined to answer questions that might be subject to executive privilege, and cited a 1982 Reagan administration policy instructing officials asked by lawmakers about information that might be subject to the privilege to hold the request pending a final determination. Still, those precedents did not address a situation in which the White House has advance notice about what will be asked.At the committee meeting earlier on Thursday, the approval to give Mr. Nadler the authority to issue the subpoena fell along party lines.Mr. Collins of Georgia called the subpoena “political theater.” In a statement, Mr. Whitaker agreed.“The committee now has deviated from historic practice and protocol and taken the unnecessary and premature step of authorizing a subpoena to me,” Mr. Whitaker said, adding, “Political theater is not the purpose of an oversight hearing, and I will not allow that to be the case.”While Mr. Nadler said that the committee would conduct the hearing in good faith, he did not withdraw the subpoena, leaving open the possibility of using it at a future date.Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A13 of the New York edition with the headline: Deal Is Reached for Chief of Justice Dept. to Testify. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageExplaining Executive Privilege and Sessions’s Refusal to Answer QuestionsJune 15, 2017ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsOpinion | How Trump Has Hurt the Gun Lobby - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperOpinion|How Trump Has Hurt the Gun LobbyAdvertisementOpinionSupported byHow Trump Has Hurt the Gun LobbyHis presidency hasn’t been the boon for gun-rights supporters that they might have hoped.By The Editorial BoardThe editorial board represents the opinions of the board, its editor and the publisher. It is separate from the newsroom and the Op-Ed section.Feb. 11, 2019ImageCreditCreditJames YangLast Valentine’s Day, a year ago this Thursday, classes were wrapping up at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School when a former student with a semiautomatic rifle murdered 17 people and wounded 17 others. It so happens that this Wednesday, the House Judiciary Committee will move to advance legislation requiring background checks on all firearm sales. The killer in the Parkland, Fla., school massacre passed such a check, but this measure would close a loophole exploited by other killers that exempts unlicensed gun sellers from conducting background checks. Support for such a change is overwhelmingly popular, even among gun owners. The bill has an excellent chance of passing the Democrat-led House. Its prospects in the Senate, controlled by the Republican majority leader, Mitch McConnell, are bleak.Even so, the very emergence of this bill is a reminder of how the gun debate has shifted since President Trump took office — and not in a direction that Second Amendment crusaders might have hoped. Politically, financially and legally, the gun-rights cause and, more specifically, the lobbying juggernaut that is the National Rifle Association have not fared well in the Trump era. If this trend continues — or accelerates — it could wind up being a rare silver lining to Mr. Trump’s presidency.Some of the challenges facing the gun lobby are not specific to Mr. Trump. A gun-loving president always makes a less effective boogeyman than a gun-skeptical one. In that way, President Barack Obama was good for the gun-rights cause — and it was perhaps inevitable that, having labored to get Mr. Trump elected, the N.R.A.’s fund-raising would taper off. In 2017, the group’s revenues dropped by $55 million, or 15 percent, over its 2016 haul, driven largely by a decline in member dues. Combined with its heavy spending in the 2016 campaign, the group now finds itself in a deep financial hole, in debt to the tune of $31.8 million. The N.R.A. has suffered Trump-specific turmoil as well. As part of the investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election, the special counsel, Robert Mueller, has been exploring possible ties between the N.R.A. and Russia. Among Mr. Mueller’s top concerns is reportedly whether Russian interests funneled money to the Trump campaign via the N.R.A. — and, if so, to what degree the group’s leaders may have known what was happening.In addition to Mr. Mueller’s interest in the N.R.A., there have been multiple congressional inquiries into a possible love triangle among the gun group, Team Trump and Russia. With Democrats now in charge of the House, expect the scrutiny to get more intense. Representative Adam Schiff, the new head of the Intelligence Committee, has said that under Republican leadership the committee did not delve deeply enough into the muck. “We were really not able to determine how the Russians used the N.R.A. as a back channel or look into allegations that the Russians may have funneled money through the N.R.A. to influence the election,” Mr. Schiff recently told The Times. “Those issues remain of deep interest to us.”Beyond any legal missteps that may be uncovered, revelations that the N.R.A. was snuggling up to Russian officials and intimates of President Vladimir Putin already have proved a public-relations nightmare. Particularly embarrassing is the bizarre case of Maria Butina, the Russian graduate student who pleaded guilty in December to working as a foreign agent and who conspired to infiltrate the N.R.A. and the Republican Party in order to help Russia influence American politics.While the Russia-N.R.A. bonds were years in the making, Americans can thank Mr. Trump for the intense spotlight on this unwholesome relationship.Last year, for the first time in nearly two decades, polling indicated that more Americans held a negative view than a positive view of the N.R.A. There has also been an upswing in support for stricter gun laws.Despite the will of the people, the Republican-controlled Congress clung to its do-nothing approach after the Parkland shooting and others like it. At the state level, however, there has been action. The private sector also got involved. Dick’s Sporting Goods and Walmart both halted the sale of assault-style weapons in their stores, along with the sale of guns and ammunition to customers under age 21. Companies ranging from MetLife to Delta to Alamo Rent A Car did away with discounts for N.R.A. members.The political world has sensed this shift in the wind. Of late, more lawmakers have seemed willing to boast about their poor ratings by the gun lobby. The 2018 elections were the first in which spending for gun-safety advertising exceeded that for guns-rights ads, and candidates backed by gun-safety groups enjoyed important victories.Not all of the change can be directly attributable to Mr. Trump, of course. But, much as women’s frustration over his presidency helped drive the #MeToo movement, his administration has energized gun-safety advocates, who have put the gun lobby and its cause on the defensive.This won’t yield an imminent revolution on regulating firearms, especially within the overly cautious halls of Congress. The N.R.A. remains a political powerhouse, an increasingly conservative Republican Party still controls the White House and the Senate, and guns remain a centerpiece of the culture war.But with a topic this polarizing, small steps deserve to be applauded — and encouraged. When lawmakers held a hearing on the background-check bill last week, it was the first hearing in eight years to broach the subject of gun violence.With a little luck and some political spine, more such actions will follow. The victims and survivors of Parkland, and of the 339 other mass shootings in 2018 alone, deserve more than pious sentiment and political cowardice.The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A22 of the New York edition with the headline: How Mr. Trump Has Hurt the Gun Lobby. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsIt Was a Busy Day in Washington. Here’s a Guide - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexU.S.SubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperU.S.|It Was a Busy Day in Washington. Here’s a GuideAdvertisementSupported byIt Was a Busy Day in Washington. Here’s a GuideImagePresident Trump said Thursday he would declare a national emergency to build his long-promised border wall.CreditCreditHerika Martinez/Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesBy Elisha BrownFeb. 14, 2019Thursday was a chaotic day in Washington, from the former deputy F.B.I. director’s confirmation that the bureau considered invoking the 25th Amendment against President Trump to the president’s plan to declare a national emergency to build a border wall.Here is a recap of some of the biggest stories:Trump said he would declare a national emergency to build a border wallCongress approved a spending package that would avert another government shutdown, and the president said he would sign the bill — but also declare a national emergency to build a wall along the southern border. That move supersedes Congress and will test the limits of presidential power.The bill passed by Congress allotted $1.375 billion for fencing, a much smaller amount than the $5.7 billion Mr. Trump wanted for a border wall. “The president is doing an end run around Congress,” said Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker.Additional Reading: • Trump Plans National Emergency to Build Border Wall as Senate Passes Spending Bill• National Emergency Powers and Trump’s Border Wall, ExplainedJustice Dept. members discussed removing Trump from office, ex-F.B.I. official saysAndrew G. McCabe, former deputy director of the F.B.I., said officials at the Department of Justice considering getting cabinet officials to invoke the 25th Amendment against Mr. Trump after he ousted James Comey, the former F.B.I. chief, in 2017. Mr. McCabe made the statement on a preview of a “60 Minutes” interview set to air Sunday, which kicks off his promotional tour for a memoir.The New York Times reported in September that Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, discussed “recruiting cabinet members to invoke the 25th Amendment” against the president. At the time, Mr. Rosenstein said the report was “inaccurate and factually incorrect.”Mr. Trump responded to Mr. McCabe’s claim on Twitter, calling him a disgrace to the bureau and the United States. The Justice Department also disputed Mr. McCabe’s statement and said Mr. Rosenstein had “no basis to invoke the 25th Amendment” against Mr. Trump.Additional Reading: • McCabe Says Justice Dept. Officials Had Discussions About Pushing Trump Out• Andrew McCabe, a Target of Trump’s F.B.I. Scorn, Is Fired Over Candor QuestionsImageWilliam Barr, the new attorney general.CreditSarah Silbiger/The New York TimesWilliam P. Barr was confirmed as attorney generalMr. Barr, who was once attorney general under President George Bush, was confirmed by Congress to lead the Department of Justice. He will oversee the agency’s investigation into Russia’s involvement in the 2016 election, led by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.Republicans, like Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, said Mr. Barr will add “steady leadership” to a Justice Department roiled by Jeff Sessions’s departure in November. Mr. Barr said he would not be swayed by politics, but he did not promise to publicize the special counsel’s findings, upsetting Democrats. During Mr. Barr’s hearings, Democrats questioned a memo he wrote in June that said presidents had broad authority to “start or stop a law enforcement proceeding.”Additional Reading: • Senate Confirms William Barr as Attorney General• A Memo and a Recusal Decision Underscore Potential Threats to the Mueller InquiryImageA White House doctor said President Trump is in “very good health,” but he gained weight since his last physical and is considered obsese.CreditDoug Mills/The New York TimesThe president is in “very good health.” But he’s also obese.The White House physician, Dr. Sean Conley, quietly released a memorandum Thursday afternoon detailing President Trump’s latest physical examination. President Trump is in “very good health,” according to Dr. Conley, but he also weighs 243 pounds, up from 239 pounds in 2018.The weight gain tipped Mr. Trump’s body mass index up to 30.4. Anything over 30 is classified as obese. Last year, President Trump said he wanted to lose at least 10 pounds.Additional Reading: • At 243 Pounds, Trump Tips the Scale Into Obesity• Trump Is in ‘Very Good Health’ Following His Annual Physical, His Doctor SaysAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsFirms Recruited by Paul Manafort Are Investigated Over Foreign Payments - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Firms Recruited by Paul Manafort Are Investigated Over Foreign PaymentsAdvertisementSupported byFirms Recruited by Paul Manafort Are Investigated Over Foreign PaymentsImagePaul Manafort, who later served as President Trump’s campaign chairman, enlisted prominent law and lobbying firms in Washington in 2012 to bolster the image of the Russia-aligned president of Ukraine.CreditCreditShawn Thew/EPA, via ShutterstockBy Kenneth P. VogelFeb. 5, 2019WASHINGTON — Federal prosecutors in recent weeks have been interviewing witnesses about the flow of foreign money to three powerful law and lobbying firms that Paul Manafort recruited seven years ago to help improve the image of the Russia-aligned president of Ukraine, people familiar with the questioning said.The previously unreported interviews about the flow of the money are among the latest developments in the investigation of key figures who worked at the three firms — Mercury Public Affairs, the Podesta Group and Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.Prosecutors have focused on the role of Skadden Arps’s lead partner on the account, the former Obama White House counsel Gregory B. Craig, in arranging financing and media coverage for his firms’ work, the people familiar with the questioning said. And the prosecutors, they said, have also been asking about the extent to which the lead partners on the accounts for Mercury and Podesta — Vin Weber, a former Republican member of Congress, and the Democratic fund-raiser Tony Podesta — were involved in orchestrating their firms’ day-to-day lobbying and public relations on the account.The case has drawn intense interest in Washington in part because of the prominence of the three main figures, each of whom has played high-profile roles in politics and lobbying. But it has also sent shock waves through the influence industry by underscoring a newly aggressive legal crackdown on lobbyists and lawyers who do lucrative work representing foreign governments without registering as foreign agents.The focus by prosecutors on precisely how the firms were paid for their work highlights the ripple effects of the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. His team’s inquiry into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election spawned the investigation into unregistered foreign lobbying by the firms, which was referred to federal prosecutors in New York.In recent weeks, people who worked with the firms on the Ukraine efforts have been summoned to Manhattan for daylong interviews with prosecutors and investigators, according to several people familiar with the questioning who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the ongoing investigation. The interviews were run by prosecutors from the office of the United States Attorney in the Southern District of New York, with assistance from the F.B.I. and the Justice Department’s National Security Division.Prosecutors from the southern district are playing central roles in a number of the investigations that have spun out of the special counsel’s work, including the escalating inquiry into President Trump’s inaugural committee.Questions have centered on what the firms’ officials knew about who was funding and directing their work, which occurred in 2012 and 2013, whether they intentionally misrepresented the source of the money and, if so, why.The work initially was advertised as being directed by a Brussels-based nonprofit group, in the cases of Mercury and Podesta, and the Ukrainian Justice Ministry, in the case of Skadden Arps. But later, it was revealed that the direction for the nonprofit came from Ukraine’s ruling party and the funding for Skadden Arps’s work came from a Ukrainian oligarch.Specifically, prosecutors have asked whether Mr. Weber may have had political motives to avoid registering as a foreign lobbyist. At the time of the lobbying, Mr. Weber was working as a top foreign policy adviser to the 2012 Republican presidential campaign of Mitt Romney. Mr. Romney’s sharply adversarial stance toward Russia was anathema to that of the Russia-aligned politician Viktor F. Yanukovych, a longtime client of Mr. Manafort who was then president of Ukraine.Mr. Manafort, who served as Mr. Trump’s campaign chairman, was convicted of some charges brought by Mr. Mueller’s team and pleaded guilty to others related to his lucrative work on behalf of Mr. Yanukovych.As part of his plea deal, Mr. Manafort agreed to cooperate with federal investigations, as did his former deputy Rick Gates, who also pleaded guilty to crimes related to their Ukrainian work. While Mr. Mueller’s team has accused Mr. Manafort of violating his deal, the New York prosecutors handling the inquiries into the work of Mercury, Podesta and Skadden Arps presented new information in recent weeks to witnesses, some of whom had been interviewed months earlier in the matter, according to the people familiar with the questioning.Mr. Manafort had recruited Skadden Arps to write a report that he intended to use to allay Western human rights concerns about the Ukrainian government’s prosecution and jailing of a political rival of Mr. Yanukovych. Mr. Manafort arranged for the firm to receive $4 million funneled from an oligarch through a Cypriot account controlled by Mr. Manafort, according to government filings.Initially, Mr. Yanukovych’s government claimed that it funded the report with a payment of about $12,000 in public funds. But the arrangement was deemed “highly suspicious” by the Kyiv Post, an influential English-language Ukrainian newspaper. In an op-ed, it cited “speculation that Skadden is being paid by someone on the side,” and urged the firm to come clean.Mr. Manafort told Mr. Craig that the oligarch wanted his involvement to remain anonymous, according to emails cited in a settlement released last month between the firm and the Justice Department. It showed that Skadden Arps declined to reveal the oligarch’s identity under questioning from the department soon after the report was published.VideoPresident Trump’s former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, has now been accused by the special counsel of violating his plea deal by repeatedly lying to federal prosecutors. But this wasn’t Mr. Manafort’s first scandal.CreditCreditDrew Angerer/Getty ImagesThe firm asserted in a letter to the department at the time that its work on the report did not constitute lobbying under the Foreign Agents Registration Act, or FARA, “and, respectfully, we therefore do not believe that you are entitled to such information.”Behind the scenes, the firm was scrambling to deflect scrutiny, according to emails quoted in the settlement, which does not name Mr. Craig or another partner on the account, Clifford M. Sloan, who also worked in the Obama administration. Their identities were confirmed by people with knowledge of the arrangement.In one email cited in the settlement, Mr. Sloan warned Mr. Craig that “the Ukraine payment situation” could “put us in a very deep hole in the western press,” if it was revealed by others. “I really think we need to get it out there as soon as we can.”Instead, according to the settlement, Mr. Craig worked with Mr. Manafort to modify the firm’s contract with Ukrainian government retroactively to bill it for $1.1 million, and to backdate the correspondence reflecting the change so it appeared as if it was executed before the Kyiv Post op-ed.In a FARA lobbying filing Skadden Arps submitted to the Justice Department last month as part of its settlement, the firm indicated that it “understood” the oligarch to be Victor Pinchuk, a steel magnate who has portrayed himself as pro-Western. A $150,000 donation by Mr. Pinchuk to Mr. Trump’s since-shuttered charitable foundation has drawn scrutiny from Mr. Mueller’s team, and he sought to distance himself from the renewed scrutiny of the report.In a statement, his representatives said that “he had no connection to the project either professionally or personally,” and “was not the source of any funds used to pay fees of Skadden in producing the report.” But the statement also said, “Mr. Pinchuk’s understanding was that Skadden’s review was going to be led by a former counselor to two U.S. presidents, and that Skadden, a pre-eminent U.S. law firm, was going to be free to reach its own conclusions based on its own independent work.”Mr. Pinchuk’s representatives also seemed to reject a claim Mr. Gates made in testimony during Mr. Manafort’s trial last year that Mr. Pinchuk used a company called Plymouth Consultants Limited to pay Mr. Manafort for an unspecified “legal project.”Skadden Arps said the firm was continuing to cooperate with federal investigators, but said its settlement with the Justice Department absolves it of any criminal exposure related to the Ukraine work. The settlement required the firm to pay the federal government $4.6 million — the total fees it received for the Ukraine work, minus $567,000 it had refunded to the Ukrainian government in 2017 as scrutiny of its work escalated — and to fully cooperate with other Justice Department investigations.Mr. Craig left Skadden Arps in April of last year as scrutiny of the Ukraine work mounted after a former associate of the firm pleaded guilty to lying to investigators about his work on the report.The settlement accused the partner known to be Mr. Craig of misleading both his partners at Skadden Arps and the Justice Department about his contact about the report with a journalist. The journalist, who is not identified in the settlement, is David E. Sanger of The New York Times. The contact with Mr. Sanger should have prompted a lobbying registration under FARA at the time, the Justice Department said in the settlement.Mr. Craig’s lawyers, William Taylor and William Murphy, said Mr. Craig “never acted as a lobbyist, press agent or public relations counsel for Ukraine,” and that Mr. Craig “never sought to mislead the Department of Justice or his former partners about his actions.”Mercury was enlisted by Mr. Manafort to help roll out Skadden Arps’s report as part of a lobbying project on behalf of the Brussels-based nonprofit group, the European Centre for a Modern Ukraine. The Podesta Group also was paid to promote the nonprofit.In recent weeks, prosecutors have asked lobbyists who worked on the account why red flags years earlier went unheeded. In particular, prosecutors have focused on a previously unreported 2012 email in which Ina Kirsch, a German citizen who was the head of European Centre, seemed to admit that the funding for the lobbying by Mercury and Podesta came from businessmen who backed Mr. Yanukovych’s party, according to people familiar with the questioning.The firms initially failed to register the work under FARA, instead disclosing it under less rigorous congressional lobbying rules, because they contended that the European Centre was not linked to Mr. Yanukovych’s government or his political party. But, under scrutiny from the Justice Department, they reversed course and registered under FARA in 2017.Allies of Mr. Podesta, Mr. Weber and their firms blamed their problems on Skadden Arps, which — separate from its work on the Ukraine project — also provided lobbying compliance advice to Mercury and Podesta, as well as on Mr. Gates. Mr. Gates admitted in his guilty plea that he “provided false and misleading representations” to Skadden Arps in an effort to convince Mercury and the Podesta Group to avoid FARA registration.Mr. Weber’s lawyer has previously said that Mr. Weber was willing to register under the act and did not do so only because Skadden Arps advised Mercury not to.Ben Protess contributed reporting from New York. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A20 of the New York edition with the headline: Firms Manafort Enlisted
Are Under Investigation
Over Foreign Payments. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageMueller’s Digging Exposes Culture of Foreign Lobbying and Its Big PaydaysAug. 1, 2018ImageManafort Plea Deal Casts New Scrutiny on Lobbyists He RecruitedSept. 14, 2018ImageLaw Firm to Pay $4.6 Million in Case Tied to Manafort and UkraineJan. 17, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptions5 Takeaways From The Times’s Interview With President Trump - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|5 Takeaways From The Times’s Interview With President TrumpAdvertisementSupported by5 Takeaways From The Times’s Interview With President TrumpImagePresident Trump held forth from the Oval Office on Thursday about the special counsel’s investigation and his relationship with his top intelligence officials, among other topics.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesBy Annie Karni, Katie Rogers and Michael TackettJan. 31, 2019Leer en españolWASHINGTON — President Trump wanted to talk. He initially invited A. G. Sulzberger, the publisher of The New York Times, to an off-the-record dinner. Mr. Sulzberger countered with a request for an on-the-record interview that included Times reporters. The White House accepted.[Read the full article from our exclusive Oval Office interview.]Mr. Trump held forth from the Oval Office about the investigation into what he called his “unimportant” business dealings in Russia before he became president; his contact with Roger J. Stone Jr., an informal adviser of many years; his relationship with his top intelligence officials; a handicapping of the 2020 presidential race; and a personal assessment of his first two years in office.Here are five takeaways from the interview.He showed no worries toward Russia or the special counsel.On all matters related to the special counsel’s investigation and questions about his business ties to Russia, Mr. Trump calmly took a nothing-to-see-here approach.He played down his interest in building a skyscraper in Moscow, calling it a “very unimportant deal.”He said he never directed Mr. Stone, who was indicted last week, to correspond with WikiLeaks to gain information about hacked Democratic emails.Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, has assured Mr. Trump’s lawyers that he is not a target of the inquiry by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, the president said. And he added that he was not engaging in witness tampering when he suggested that the father-in-law of Michael Cohen, his former lawyer and fixer, should be investigated.“I had no money invested,” Mr. Trump said of the Moscow project. His lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani stated at one point that Mr. Trump was involved in discussions to build a Moscow tower throughout the 2016 presidential campaign. But Mr. Trump said that Mr. Giuliani “was incorrect” and “was wrong.”Mr. Trump said at first that he “didn’t see” Mr. Stone’s indictment, which indicated that a senior campaign official was directed by an unnamed person to contact Mr. Stone about additional WikiLeaks releases that might prove damaging to the Clinton campaign.But he later appeared to contradict himself, noting, “I know what was in the indictment — if you read it there was no collusion with Russia.”He’s made up with his intelligence officials.On Tuesday, top United States intelligence officials released their annual “Worldwide Threat Assessment,” which concluded that North Korea was unlikely to give up its nuclear stockpiles, Iran did not appear to be taking steps to make a nuclear bomb and the Islamic State would continue its aggression in Syria. All those assertions directly contradicted Mr. Trump’s foreign policy positions.The president was initially displeased. “Perhaps Intelligence should go back to school!” Mr. Trump tweeted Wednesday. He also said then that he was not happy with either the director of national intelligence, Dan Coats, or the C.I.A. director, Gina Haspel.By Thursday, all was forgiven, the president said. He said the intelligence officials assured him, “Sir, our testimony was totally mischaracterized.” The president said that after he read the testimony, he felt they were on the same page.He also presented reporters a printout of a tweet sent during the interview — “sometimes I dictate tweets,” he said — that featured a photo of his earlier meeting with intelligence chiefs.VideoIn an interview with The New York Times, President Trump indicated that he would most likely take action on a border wall on his own after talks with Congress end in two weeks, among other subjects.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesHe believes border security negotiations with Democrats will be ‘a waste of time.’Mr. Trump, who struck a deal with Democrats last Friday to open the government temporarily, seemed to dismiss the idea that an agreement could be reached over his demand for funding for a wall along the southwestern border. The president said he would wait to act until the continuing resolution to fund the government expires on Feb. 15, but then called the wait “a waste of time.”He again hinted that he had already made his mind up and that he was satisfied with his characterization of a crisis at the border. When asked if he would declare a national emergency to try to secure his demand for funding, Mr. Trump said, “I’ve set the table. I’ve set the stage for doing what I’m going to do.”The president, who has recently tempered his criticism of Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s negotiation skills, used stronger language on Thursday, saying that he had gotten along with her in the past, but no longer.“I think she’s doing a tremendous disservice to the country,” Mr. Trump said.He’s carefully sizing up the 2020 competition.The president has been keeping an eye on potential Democratic challengers in 2020 — “they’ve really drifted far left” — taking particular note, approvingly, of Senator Kamala Harris of California. Ms. Harris has been credited with a strong rollout that included numerous news appearances nationwide and a town hall-style meeting in Iowa broadcast on CNN.Of the potential opponents who have announced their bids so far, Mr. Trump said “I would say the best opening so far would be Kamala Harris,” adding, “Better crowd. Better enthusiasm.”He then said of Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, resurrecting a derisive nickname for her, “I do think Elizabeth Warren has been hurt very badly with the Pocahontas trap.” He added, “I may be wrong about that.”The president also expressed confidence that he would not have a serious rival in the Republican primary race.“I don’t see it,” Mr. Trump said, before adding, “I guess anything is possible.”He loves his job and says he’s accomplished a lot, but regrets how much money it’s cost him.Mr. Trump said that he was planning to run for re-election, and that there would be no point at which he had decided he had accomplished enough.“It’s a very big job,” he said, “and there’s a lot to do.” But Mr. Trump also suggested that the presidency had been “more of a burden on me than other presidents,” and accused his predecessors of artificial achievements that did not amount to the work he had done to produce a healthy economy.“I don’t know if I should love doing it, but I love doing it,” he said.He said that he would be focusing on national security “very much” should he win a second term. Later, he again reminisced about his life as a businessman and mused about the money he has lost since assuming the presidency.“This is, this is one of the great losers of all time,” Mr. Trump said. “You know, fortunately, I don’t need money. This is one of the great losers of all time.”Related CoverageTrump, in Interview, Calls Wall Talks ‘Waste of Time’ and Dismisses InvestigationsJan. 31, 2019ImageFact-Checking President Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesFeb. 1, 2019ImageExcerpts From Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesFeb. 1, 2019ImageTrump Discusses Claims of ‘Fake News,’ and Their Impact, With New York Times PublisherFeb. 1, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsDonald Trump, Justin Fairfax, Grammy Awards: Your Monday Briefing - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexBriefingSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperBriefing|Donald Trump, Justin Fairfax, Grammy Awards: Your Monday BriefingAdvertisementSupported byDonald Trump, Justin Fairfax, Grammy Awards: Your Monday BriefingBy Chris StanfordFeb. 11, 2019(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning,We start today with a breakdown in border security talks
and the winners of last night’s Grammy Awards.ImageMigrants tried to cross into El Paso, at the U.S. border with Mexico, this month.CreditJose Luis Gonzalez/ReutersNew shutdown looms as border talks break downEfforts to reach a border security deal bogged down on Sunday, less than a week before parts of the federal government are again set to run out of money.The details: The breakdown appears to center on Democratic demands for a limit on the number of unauthorized immigrants already in the U.S. who could be detained by Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers. That could force the Trump administration to focus on immigrants with criminal records, rather than on broader sweeps. Looking ahead: President Trump is scheduled to hold a rally tonight in El Paso to build support for his proposed border wall. Officials in the West Texas city dispute the president’s assertion that border fencing has reduced violent crime there.Related: Gov. Gavin Newsom of California is expected to withdraw nearly 400 of his state’s National Guard troops from the border with Mexico today.A clue about the special counsel’s investigationOne of Robert Mueller’s prosecutors suggested last week that the special counsel investigation was focusing on Trump campaign officials’ response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2014 and to American sanctions on Moscow.According to a transcript of a hearing in Washington, the prosecutor, Andrew Weissmann, discussed contacts between President Trump’s former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, and a Russian associate. Mr. Mueller’s team says that Mr. Manafort misled them about those discussions, and when pressed by the judge about why it mattered, Mr. Weissmann said, “This goes, I think, very much to the heart of what the special counsel’s office is investigating.”Background: Prosecutions by the special counsel have skirted the question of whether there was some kind of deal between Russia and Mr. Trump’s campaign. Persuading the U.S. to ease or end sanctions has been a primary goal of Moscow. Mr. Trump has dismissed Mr. Mueller’s investigation as a “witch hunt.”Virginia lawmaker takes a step to impeach No. 2 officialA draft resolution sent to a state House committee on Sunday directs lawmakers to determine whether the sexual assault accusations facing Lt. Gov. Justin Fairfax constitute grounds for impeachment.Mr. Fairfax has denied accusations from two women and released a statement over the weekend calling for an investigation and “due process.”Some Democrats are wary of impeaching Mr. Fairfax, who is black, without taking action against the governor and attorney general, who are white and have resisted calls to step down after acknowledging wearing blackface in the 1980s.Go deeper: Gov. Ralph Northam’s early life on the Eastern Shore of Virginia helped shape his views on race.Reaction: According to a poll conducted for The Times, one in five American adults has seen someone wear blackface. Far fewer said they had worn blackface themselves.ImageAt the Tabiat Bridge in Tehran. The strict rules governing Iranian society have loosened in the 40 years since the revolution.CreditArash Khamooshi for The New York TimesThe Iranian revolution at 40The government in Tehran collapsed on Feb. 11, 1979, after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, who had helped inspire the uprising, returned from exile.The country has changed enormously in the four decades since, as a growing middle class has quietly rebelled against the rigid ideology of the revolution’s early years.Our correspondent in Tehran takes us inside a society where divisions between the private and the public have broken down.Looking ahead: The Trump administration has been pressuring Iraq to stop buying energy from Iran, raising tensions between Washington and Baghdad. If you have 8 minutes, this is worth itA princess who tried to escapeImageIn a video she secretly recorded last year, the adult daughter of the ruler of Dubai described a life of rigid restrictions and stunted hopes in the United Arab Emirates: “Especially if you’re a female, your life is so disposable.”In March, the princess known as Sheikha Latifa, pictured above left with her trainer, announced that she had left Dubai “for good.” But she was soon captured at sea and forcibly taken back. This is the story of her short-lived escape and the video that has reminded the world of the few freedoms allotted to women in the region. Here’s what else is happeningSplitting the bill for troops: South Korea agreed on Sunday to increase its contribution for the cost of the U.S. military presence on the Korean Peninsula. The deal resolves a dispute that had raised fears that President Trump might propose a reduced presence as a bargaining chip during his next summit meeting with the North Korean leader.Pacific Northwest snowstorm: Seattle has already had its snowiest February since 1949, and several more storms are threatening the region.The 2020 election: Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota entered the race for the Democratic presidential nomination on Sunday, and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts formally announced her run on Saturday.Protests in Europe: More than 50,000 people across France marched in the 13th straight weekend of “Yellow Vest” demonstrations. Separately, protesters in Spain called for the ouster of Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez after he proposed talks over the secessionist movement in Catalonia.ImageCreditFabrice Coffrini/Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesSnapshot: Above, Lindsey Vonn finished third on Sunday in the final race of her career, in Sweden. The 34-year-old American skier won an unprecedented 20 season-long World Cup discipline and overall titles from 2008 to 2016, as well as three Olympic medals. We selected photographs from her career. Grammy Awards: Kacey Musgraves won album of the year on Sunday for “Golden Hour,” at a ceremony in which women took center stage. The awards show was criticized last year for its track record on gender representation. Here’s the full list of winners, and photographs from the red carpet. What we’re reading: This essay on digital postpartum loneliness in Wired. Jenna Wortham, a staff writer for The New York Times Magazine, writes: “Instagram, in many ways, is an alternate reality. Pieces like these are essential for getting a grip on the projections and narratives that social media fosters.”Now, a break from the newsImageCreditDavid Malosh for The New York TimesCook: Transform cauliflower into a weeknight vegan curry. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recipe recommendations.)Go: San Juan, the Puerto Rican capital, offers lovely beaches, energetic night life and gregarious island charm. Watch: Albert Finney, the distinguished British thespian and five-time Oscar nominee, died last week. Stream some of his best performances at home.Listen: Ariana Grande’s latest single is “Break Up With Your Girlfriend, I’m Bored,” a satisfying thumper with an astral-trap beat, Jon Caramanica writes.Smarter Living: If you have a chance to spoil yourself, try spending to enhance where you spend the most time. A cruise can be wonderful, but a great mattress or a comfortable pillow offers six to eight hours of pampering every night.Our lead consumer tech writer also has ideas on combating “bait apps” that lure your kids into buying junk online.And now for the Back Story on …A dance move that’s back in the newsIt was 1983, and 47 million people in the U.S. were watching Michael Jackson moonwalk across the stage to his hit “Billie Jean” during a TV special.The performance immortalized a move that recently re-entered the public consciousness when Virginia’s governor, Ralph Northam, who is white, said he had dressed as Jackson and done the moonwalk during a dance contest in 1984.ImageMichael Jackson during the performance that immortalized the moonwalk.CreditPaul Drinkwater/NBC/NBCU Photo Bank, via Getty ImagesIn Jackson’s 1988 autobiography, which shares its name with the famous move, he describes the moonwalk as “a ‘popping’ type of thing that black kids had created dancing on street corners in the ghetto.”The moonwalk had been performed for decades by a range of entertainers (albeit often by a more literal name, the backslide). But it was the King of Pop who would be remembered, as one dance critic put it, “coasting backward across the stage, step by gliding step, as if on a cushion of air.”That’s it for this briefing. Since the Westminster Dog Show begins tonight in New York, we combed through The Times’s photo archives and found dogs that were stars long before Instagram. See you next time.— ChrisThank youTo Eleanor Stanford, James K. Williamson and John Dorman for the break from the news. Chris Stanford went overtime to write today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.P.S.• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela, who is preventing millions of dollars’ worth of aid from entering the country.• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: The “turf” part of “surf and turf” (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here. • The Times announced its inaugural class of newsroom fellows last week. Twenty-two were selected from more than 5,000 applicants.Chris Stanford is based in London and writes the U.S. version of the Morning Briefing. He also compiles a weekly news quiz. He was previously a producer for the desktop home page and mobile site, helping to present The New York Times’s news report to readers. Before joining The Times in 2013, he was an editor and designer at The Washington Post and other news organizations.
@stanfordc AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsAurora Shooting Updates: 5 Killed and Several Others Wounded - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexU.S.SubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperU.S.|Aurora Shooting Updates: 5 Killed and Several Others WoundedAdvertisementSupported byAurora Shooting Updates: 5 Killed and Several Others WoundedVideoA gunman opened fire inside an industrial complex in Aurora, Ill., on Friday. The shooter killed five people and injured several others, including five police officers.CreditCreditLaura McDermott for The New York TimesBy Julie Bosman and Mitch SmithFeb. 15, 2019AURORA, Ill. — A former warehouse employee who had recently lost his job stormed through his old workplace in suburban Chicago on Friday, killing five workers and injuring five police officers.The gunman, whom the authorities identified as Gary Martin, 45, of Aurora, Ill., was killed in an exchange of gunfire with officers.His sister, Tameka Martin, said Mr. Martin had worked at the Henry Pratt Company’s industrial warehouse for about 20 years before he was let go two weeks ago. The police said they believed that Mr. Martin had lost his job even more recently, on Friday.A worker received non-life-threatening injuries in the shooting at the company’s warehouse, where valves and control devices used in water and power systems are designed.Scores of law enforcement authorities swarmed the facility in Aurora, about 40 miles west of downtown Chicago; sections of the city were cordoned off; and schools were forced to keep students inside for more than an hour.By late Friday, officials said they were notifying the families of those who had died, and would not yet release their names.Four hospitals reported treating at least seven people who were hurt. Among the wounded were five Aurora police officers who were shot and a sixth officer who was injured responding to the gunfire inside the warehouse. The officers’ injuries were not believed to be life threatening.ImageEmployees of the Henry Pratt Company leaving the scene of Friday’s shooting. The company designs valves and control devices used in water and power systems.CreditMatt Marton/Associated PressThe first calls of a shooting at the warehouse began pouring in at 1:24 p.m. local time, Kristen Ziman, Aurora’s police chief, said. The first officers arrived four minutes later, rushing in and immediately being shot at, she said. Two of the first four officers to arrive were shot.Chief Ziman said officers from other departments converged on the site, and teams were assembled to search for the gunman inside the sprawling, 29,000-square-foot building. When they eventually found him, about 90 minutes after the search began, they shot and killed him, she said. The police said he was armed with a handgun.John Probst, an employee who was in the building at the time, told ABC 7 Chicago that he recognized the gunman, a co-worker, “running down the aisle” with a pistol that had a green laser attached to it.He said he saw one person who was shot and “was bleeding pretty bad.” He believed there were others who had been shot in the office. He said he and another co-worker ran out the back door, and he heard more shots once he was outside.Officials from Mueller Water Products, of which the Henry Pratt Company is a subsidiary, issued a statement late Friday expressing shock and sadness.“Our hearts are with the victims and their loved ones, the first responders, the Aurora community and the entire Mueller family during this extremely difficult time,” the statement said. “Our entire focus is on the health and well-being of our colleagues, and we are committed to providing any and all support to them and their families.”The officials did not respond to specific questions, and employees reached by phone on Friday night said they had been told not to comment. The company, founded in 1901, has its headquarters in Aurora, according to its website, and also has manufacturing facilities in Washington State and Indiana.Ms. Martin said she had seen her brother a few days ago at a dinner at her mother’s house, and she described him as “very depressed, very depressed.” She added, “He really didn’t say too much to me.”Mr. Martin’s family members met with officers at the Police Department late Friday; some embraced and wept.The authorities conducted a search of Mr. Martin’s home on Friday night.For hours on Friday afternoon, a chaotic scene played out in Aurora, a city of 200,000 residents, as fire trucks, ambulances and police squad cars jammed the neighborhood of houses and warehouses.Worried parents waited as schools — including one not far from the warehouse — ordered students to shelter in place for more than an hour. Officers searched the blocks around the warehouse. Rescue officials stood by waiting to carry more patients to hospitals. And officials from the coroner’s office were called.ImageGary Martin“It’s a shame that mass shootings such as this have become commonplace in our country,” Mayor Richard C. Irvin of Aurora said. “It’s a shame that a cold and heartless offender would be so selfish as to think he has a right to take an innocent life.”By evening, political leaders from around the nation began issuing news releases and posting messages on social media offering sympathy and support.The White House said that President Trump had been briefed on the situation and was monitoring it. J. B. Pritzker, the new governor of Illinois, traveled to Aurora and praised the police officers who ran inside during the shooting.“You rushed toward danger, and in doing that you saved countless lives,” Mr. Pritzker said.Rosalee Andrada, 54, lives in a house on Cleveland Avenue, only steps from the building where the shooting took place. She had just taken her daily medication when she heard sharp staccato sounds coming from outside.“I thought it was just ice cracking,” she said.But her husband, Jose, hustled her and their husky, Rocky, into the basement. She said she heard five shots in total.Rocky was anxious and wanted to come upstairs, Ms. Andrada said, so they climbed the basement steps and looked through the kitchen window. Countless police officers had converged on the scene, a cacophony of lights and sirens.She saw three officers helping a wounded colleague, who held his hand to his neck.“They were carrying out their brother,” she said.Julie Bosman reported from Aurora, Ill., and Mitch Smith from Chicago. Julia Jacobs contributed reporting from New York, and Doris Burke contributed research from New York. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Gunman Kills 5 At a Warehouse West of Chicago. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsWhat Do You Learn About Trump in an 85-Minute Interview? - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|What Do You Learn About Trump in an 85-Minute Interview?AdvertisementSupported byWhite House MemoWhat Do You Learn About Trump in an 85-Minute Interview?ImagePresident Trump offered plenty of clues for Trumpologists seeking to understand him during an interview with The New York Times on Thursday.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesBy Peter Baker and Maggie HabermanFeb. 1, 2019WASHINGTON — President Trump regularly expresses pique over scathing kiss-and-tell books written by former aides and advisers. But he had no beef with “Let Me Finish” by Chris Christie, the former New Jersey governor and his onetime transition director.“Well, honestly,” Mr. Trump said in an interview in the Oval Office this week, “he was very nice to me.”But not nice to his family, it was pointed out, most notably Jared Kushner, his son-in-law and senior adviser, who was eviscerated in the book. “No,” Mr. Trump conceded, “but he was unbelievably nice to me, actually.”An 85-minute interview with the president offers plenty of clues for Trumpologists seeking to understand him and the ways of his byzantine court — who is up and who is down, what he cares about and what he does not, what he knows and what he does not. Intentionally or by happenstance, Mr. Trump sends signals that are then scrutinized, analyzed and even satirized.Mr. Kushner was not the only person in the president’s orbit to meet the underside of a bus during his session with The New York Times on Thursday. Mr. Trump chided aides for not connecting him with the author Bob Woodward before his own book was published. He said his lawyer, Rudolph W. Giuliani, was “wrong” about a Trump project in Moscow and “has been wrong” on other matters.He went after former Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, rewriting the history of their split. While Mr. Mattis resigned in protest of the president’s decision to pull out of Syria, Mr. Trump insisted that he pushed the secretary out. “I wasn’t happy with the job that he was doing at all,” he said. “And I said, ‘It’s time.’ That’s why in the letter he wrote, ‘You have to have your own choice.’ The reason he said that was because I said, ‘You’re just not my choice.’”In fact, Mr. Mattis showed up at the White House with his resignation letter already written. Mr. Trump initially accepted it and characterized it as a retirement “with distinction,” but took offense after seeing reports characterizing the letter as a rebuke and forced Mr. Mattis to leave two months earlier than originally scheduled.On the other hand, Mr. Trump signaled forgiveness of sorts for Stephen K. Bannon, his onetime chief strategist who was excommunicated from Mr. Trump’s camp after talking with another author for a book that savaged the president. “If you’ve seen him on an interview over the last six months, I think there’s nobody that speaks better” about him, Mr. Trump said, adding that the two had not spoken in more than a year.Also on the positive side of Mr. Trump’s ledger was William P. Barr, his nominee for attorney general. Although the president was reported to be unhappy when Mr. Barr at his confirmation hearing described a close relationship with Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, Mr. Trump said the testimony “was totally acceptable to me” and that Mr. Barr will be “a great attorney general.”Perhaps most notably let out of the president’s doghouse were the nation’s intelligence chiefs, whom he had described just a day earlier as “extremely passive and naïve” people who “should go back to school!” Now, he said, all was fine because they had reassured him that their report to Congress this week that conflicted with his foreign policy had been misinterpreted by the news media.The media, of course, remains permanently in the presidential doghouse, although Mr. Trump enjoys talking with reporters and bashing them in almost equal proportions. On Thursday, he gave the reporters three times as much time as scheduled, gamely taking on all questions, unrushed, and asked them to call him personally if they had questions. “I came from Jamaica, Queens, Jamaica Estates, and I became president of the United States,” he said, beseeching A.G. Sulzberger, the Times publisher, for better coverage. “I’m sort of entitled to a great story from my — just one — from my newspaper.”But Mr. Trump’s description of his call-on-the-carpet meeting with the intelligence chiefs underscored how the president forms what his former communications director, Anthony Scaramucci, himself an author of a tell-all, once called Mr. Trump’s “reality distortion field” where he “curves facts toward himself.”Reporting to Congress earlier in the week, Dan Coats, the director of national intelligence, and his counterparts said that North Korea was unlikely to give up its nuclear weapons, Iran was not currently building a bomb and the Islamic State was not defeated, all conclusions at odds with the president’s approach.In their meeting on Thursday, Mr. Trump said he challenged them on this disconnect. “One of the things they said very strongly, according to — was that Iran is, essentially, a wonderful place,” the president recounted. “And I said, ‘It’s not a wonderful place, it’s a bad place, and they’re doing bad things.’ And they said, ‘We agree.’ I said: ‘What do you mean you agree? You can’t agree.’ And they said the testimony was totally mischaracterized.”But it may be that Mr. Trump was the one who mischaracterized it or at least misunderstood it. The intelligence chiefs never said that Iran was a “wonderful place” or anything like it; they simply said there was no evidence of a nuclear program in violation of the agreement it made to give it up. Mr. Trump in effect set up a straw man by overstating their testimony, and they could honestly knock it down without taking back what they actually did say.If so, it worked. Mr. Trump was happy enough to blame the disparity on the news media via Twitter — tweets that were actually sent out while he was talking with his Times visitors. He had an aide fetch printouts of the tweets to pass around.When it was noted that he had been in the room with them when the tweets were posted from his account, he acknowledged, “Well, sometimes I dictate tweets.”In interviews, Mr. Trump can be like an unguided missile; it’s never entirely clear where the conversation will head. In defending his approach to the presidency, he summoned the spirits of George Washington, who he said also kept a business while in office, and John F. Kennedy, who appointed his brother as attorney general.Mr. Trump does not obsess about precision. He suggested that it was excessive for the F.B.I. to deploy a “team of 29 people with AK-27s, or whatever they were using” to arrest his longtime associate, Roger J. Stone Jr. There is no such thing as an AK-27 rifle. Presumably, the self-described Second Amendment champion was confusing it with the AK-47, although the F.B.I. of course does not use Russian-made weapons.Pinning him down can be a challenge. Mr. Trump was asked if he was the person in Mr. Stone’s indictment who directed a campaign official to contact Mr. Stone about damaging information in the possession of WikiLeaks, which was releasing Democratic emails stolen by Russian agents.“Can I tell you? I didn’t see it,” he said of the indictment. But then he suggested he was knowledgeable about what was in the document. “I know what was in the indictment — if you read it, there was no collusion with Russia.”Similarly, referring to Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, he first said, “Rod told me I’m not a target of the investigation.” But then he suggested that the assurance had gone to his lawyers. “The lawyers would speak to him a lot about that,” he said.And he said that he did not initially know about a memo that Mr. Barr wrote as a private lawyer criticizing one of Mr. Mueller’s lines of inquiry, only becoming aware of it later. “I mean, I read it afterwards,” he said. Then he said: “I didn’t see the memo. I never read the memo.”Truth be told, he did not read Mr. Christie’s book either. (Sorry, governor.) He knew that Mr. Christie wrote nice things about him because his staff summarized it for him. “I don’t have time to read it, but I get all — I have somebody — boom, boom! They give me quotes, it’s like five pages,” Mr. Trump said. “That you can read, right? And he was very respectful of me.”And so Mr. Trump would be respectful in return. No matter what Mr. Kushner might think. Follow Peter Baker and Maggie Haberman on Twitter: @peterbakernyt and @maggienyt.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A15 of the New York edition with the headline: Trove of Trumpisms
For the Trumpologist. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageTrump, in Interview, Calls Wall Talks ‘Waste of Time’ and Dismisses InvestigationsJan. 31, 2019ImageExcerpts From Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesFeb. 1, 2019Image5 Takeaways From The Times’s Interview With President TrumpJan. 31, 2019ImageShow AllAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsDemocratic Donor Who Pivoted to Trump Draws Scrutiny in Inaugural Inquiry - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Democratic Donor Who Pivoted to Trump Draws Scrutiny in Inaugural InquiryAdvertisementSupported byDemocratic Donor Who Pivoted to Trump Draws Scrutiny in Inaugural InquiryImageThe place setting for President Trump’s inaugural lunch. Prosecutors are seeking information about the inaugural committee and its financing.CreditCreditAl Drago/The New York TimesBy Kenneth P. Vogel, David D. Kirkpatrick and Maggie HabermanFeb. 5, 2019WASHINGTON — In the world of big-dollar political donors, Imaad Zuberi is notable less for the scale of his giving than for its baldly transactional nature. A supporter of President Barack Obama and then Hillary Clinton’s 2016 campaign who frequently posted pictures of himself alongside high-profile politicians, Mr. Zuberi, a California venture capitalist, abruptly pivoted after Donald J. Trump’s victory.Telling friends he needed to act quickly to balance out his political connections if he hoped to maintain access, he donated more than $1.1 million to committees associated with Mr. Trump and the Republican Party in the three months after the 2016 election.It seemed to work. Mr. Zuberi scored coveted invitations to a pair of black-tie dinners celebrating Mr. Trump’s inauguration. In the process, he posted photos of himself with the president, as well as Mr. Trump’s first chief of staff, Reince Priebus, and Mr. Trump’s picks for Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin; housing and urban development secretary, Ben Carson; and defense secretary, Jim Mattis.But the biggest donation of his postelection flurry — $900,000 paid by Mr. Zuberi’s California firm, Avenue Ventures, to Mr. Trump’s inaugural committee — is now being scrutinized by federal prosecutors in the Southern District of New York as part of what appears to be an escalating investigation into the inauguration and its financing.On Monday, the prosecutors served a subpoena on the inaugural committee, demanding it turn over records detailing its finances, including all donations and expenditures, as well as perks like photo opportunities and V.I.P. receptions offered to major donors. Mr. Zuberi and Avenue Ventures were the only donors named in the subpoena.The subpoena focused particularly on foreign money, which inaugural committees are legally prohibited from accepting. It requested records related to donations “made by or on behalf of foreign nationals,” and the committee’s procedures for preventing such donations.Mr. Zuberi is an American citizen. The subpoena does not state the nature of prosecutors’ interests in Mr. Zuberi or his company.His spokesman, Steve Rabinowitz, said the money Mr. Zuberi donated to the inaugural fund was “all his money, his personal money, certainly not foreign money.” Mr. Zuberi “has no business with the U.S. government, and there is nothing that the U.S. government can be particularly helpful to him with,” Mr. Rabinowitz added.In an interview, Mr. Zuberi said that his donations were “more of a networking thing,” intended mostly to help him meet people who could help with a New York real estate investment fund.“To open doors, I have to donate,” he said. “It’s just a fact of life.” He added, “Not only did it not yield any business, but it actually backfired,” because of the attention he has received since his donation was cited in the subpoena.But Mr. Zuberi’s activity around the time of the inauguration suggests that he quickly came into contact with a variety of people in Mr. Trump’s orbit, some of whom, according to associates briefed on the conversations, discussed business opportunities with him.In the month after the election, Mr. Zuberi posted a photo on Facebook with Mr. Trump’s incoming national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, a few days before Mr. Zuberi indicated on Facebook that he traveled to the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia.Mr. Rabinowitz said his client merely bumped into Mr. Flynn at Trump Tower, and asked to take a selfie. “There was no meeting with Mike Flynn,” Mr. Rabinowitz said.Mr. Zuberi said he briefly discussed the possibility of doing business with a pair of top Trump fund-raisers — Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s former personal lawyer and fixer, and Elliott Broidy, a California investor. Mr. Zuberi said his discussion about business opportunities with Mr. Broidy took place last year.Those conversations never progressed beyond the initial stages, according to Mr. Zuberi, who said he and Mr. Cohen discussed a Manhattan real estate venture, while he and Mr. Broidy discussed an artificial intelligence start-up.Nonetheless, prosecutors asked Mr. Cohen about his dealings with Mr. Zuberi after Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty late last year to a range of crimes, and agreed to cooperate with various investigations. Mr. Cohen has spent more than 70 hours with investigators with the Manhattan prosecutors and the office of the special counsel investigating Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election, Robert S. Mueller III. Mr. Mueller referred the case to the New York prosecutors.The federal investigation by prosecutors in Manhattan is different from one taking place in Brooklyn, where federal prosecutors are also examining inaugural officials and other entities that supported Mr. Trump.The inaugural committee was led by a longtime friend of Mr. Trump’s, Thomas J. Barrack Jr., who raised a record $107 million for the festivities. A memo drafted for Mr. Barrack’s investment company, Colony, shortly after the inauguration showed a plan by the firm to capitalize on ties to the president “while avoiding any appearance of lobbying.”The memo’s existence was first reported by ProPublica. A spokesman for Colony said in a statement that the memo was “simply an outline of a proposed potential business plan,” and that it was “never acted upon or implemented.” The statement put the blame for the plan on Rick Gates, who was Mr. Barrack’s right-hand man for the inauguration. Mr. Gates has pleaded guilty to conspiracy and lying to investigators and is cooperating with the special counsel.The subpoena to the inaugural committee also asks for records related to the tech company Stripe, which processed payments by donors to the inaugural fund, including credit card transactions.Based in San Francisco, Stripe is registered with the Treasury Department as a money services business, and by law is required to keep an eye out for and report suspicious transactions. Most such businesses have highly automated programs designed to spot unusual transactions.For instance, if a donor listed a residence in Texas, but used a credit card that had been issued overseas, Stripe’s compliance officers might have raised questions about the true source of the funds.The subpoena asks for communications between the inaugural committee and Stripe. It is not clear whether Stripe received a separate subpoena for its transaction or reporting records related to the inaugural fund. The company declined to comment.One of Stripe’s investors, Thrive Capital, is controlled by Josh Kushner, the younger brother of Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law and senior adviser. But there is no indication that investigators are interested in that connection.The scrutiny of the inaugural committee underscores the degree to which the investigations surrounding Mr. Trump, once centered on potential ties to Russia’s meddling in the 2016 presidential election, have expanded and splintered into multiple inquiries touching on a wide range of topics, including his business, his campaign, his inauguration and his presidency.Mr. Rabinowitz said Mr. Zuberi “has never been contacted by the special counsel’s office or by any U.S. attorney’s office and has no knowledge of any of them having ever inquired about him.”Mr. Zuberi’s donations were channeled through Caroline Wren, a veteran Republican fund-raiser who worked for the committee that funded the 2016 Republican National Convention in Cleveland, to which Mr. Zuberi donated $100,000 in January 2017 — months after the convention — according to Mr. Rabinowitz.Ms. Wren, who did not respond to requests for comment, also was Mr. Zuberi’s point of contact for his inaugural donation.He was rewarded during the inaugural festivities with a seat at an elite candlelight dinner next to the Turkish foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu. Mr. Zuberi said that he received 10 tickets to the dinner, and that while he could not remember if he gave one of them to Mr. Cavusoglu, he had been acquainted with the foreign minister before the dinner because he was pursuing a business project in Turkey.At another dinner, for foreign diplomats in Washington, Mr. Zuberi was assigned a seat at a table to be headed by Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, and including Howard Lorber, a New York business executive close to Mr. Trump, as well as diplomats from Cambodia, Cameroon and Bahrain, where Mr. Zuberi’s private equity funds have had big investments. (A spokesman for Mr. Cornyn later said the senator did not end up attending the dinner.)A photo from the event shows Mr. Zuberi in conversation with Mr. Trump and other guests.Mr. Zuberi’s company, Avenue Ventures, manages private equity funds but also often acts as a consultant or intermediary for investors. It has had offices in China and Dubai, United Arab Emirates, and its funds have reportedly invested in real estate in India and a resort in Bahrain. It has listed as advisers retired Gen. Wesley K. Clark, a Democratic presidential candidate in 2004, and Richard G. Olson, who was the ambassador to Pakistan and the United Arab Emirates.Executives who do business in the Persian Gulf and a person close to Mr. Zuberi said his firm had done business or sought investments in several gulf kingdoms, including Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, as well as in Turkey.Maintaining visible access to the highest levels of American government has become an essential tool of Mr. Zuberi’s private equity business, two people close to him said. His company often oversees investments in infrastructure or other projects requiring government contracts or approval in the United States or more often abroad, and his high-profile American contacts create an appearance of influence that he uses to court investors and business partners.In at least one case, his habit of trading on his political connections has veered into acting as an agent for a foreign government. In 2015, the scandal-plagued government of Sri Lanka paid a total of $6.5 million to Mr. Zuberi and another company linked to him, for services that appear to have included seeking to influence the American government, the magazine Foreign Policy reported. Mr. Zuberi belatedly registered as a consultant to the government of Sri Lanka, as required by law under the Foreign Agents Registration Act.The Clinton presidential campaign was nonetheless eager for his donations. In November 2015, the campaign staff sent its chairman, John D. Podesta, a memo summarizing the Foreign Policy article in preparation for a meeting with Mr. Zuberi in Los Angeles.“Thank him for his support of the campaign,” the memorandum reminded Mr. Podesta — in one of several Clinton campaign documents made public by WikiLeaks. “Imaad was one of the first donors to contribute to the Hillary Victory Fund this week (our joint fund-raising committee with the D.N.C.).”Mr. Zuberi, who contributed $615,000 of his own money to Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, also raised $270,000 from other donors, according to the memo.He conceded that it was not ideal that those with significant wealth could donate it to gain access to elected officials in a manner that those with less money could not.“That’s just fortunately or unfortunately how it works,” he said. “We don’t have the perfect system, but we probably have the best system in the world.”Correction: Feb. 27, 2019An earlier version of this article, relying on incomplete information from the inaugural committee, referred incorrectly to the seating around Imaad Zuberi at an inaugural dinner. While Senator John Cornyn was assigned a seat at the table, a spokesman notified The Times after publication of the article that Mr. Cornyn had not attended the dinner.Kenneth P. Vogel reported from Washington, David D. Kirkpatrick from London and Maggie Haberman from New York. Sharon LaFraniere, Katie Benner and Ben Protess contributed reporting. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Donating to Clinton and Trump, And Named in Inaugural Inquiry. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageTrump Inaugural Drew Big Dollars From Donors With Vested InterestsApril 19, 2017ImageTrump Inaugural Fund and Super PAC Said to Be Scrutinized for Illegal Foreign DonationsDec. 13, 2018ImageTrump Inaugural Committee Ordered to Hand Over Documents to Federal InvestigatorsFeb. 4, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsStephen Colbert Gives a Live Takedown After the State of the Union - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexTelevisionSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperTelevision|Stephen Colbert Gives a Live Takedown After the State of the UnionAdvertisementSupported byBest of Late NightStephen Colbert Gives a Live Takedown After the State of the UnionImage“This was not a particularly good speech, but what it lacked in quality it made up for in length,” Stephen Colbert said. “This speech was like watching paint lie.”CreditCreditCBSBy Giovanni RussonelloFeb. 6, 2019Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.‘Not a Particularly Good Speech’Stephen Colbert broadcast live on Tuesday, responding to President Trump’s State of the Union address with jokes written just moments before.Trump’s delivery was, by the president’s standards, restrained and uneventful. But Colbert gave it no high marks.“This was not a particularly good speech, but what it lacked in quality it made up for in length. This speech was like watching paint lie.” — STEPHEN COLBERTCreditCreditVideo by The Late Show with Stephen ColbertExaggerating the relative strength of the United States economy, Trump told Congress, “We are considered far and away the hottest economy anywhere in the world.” That put Colbert in mind of one of Trump’s more infamous moments, from 2006.“It is so hot, if it wasn’t my economy perhaps I’d be dating it.” — STEPHEN COLBERT, referring to a statement the president made on “The View” about his daughter IvankaAnd Colbert joked about Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s largely unenthusiastic reactions to Trump’s speech.“She showed great restraint, did not stick out her tongue once. She was chewing on it for a while, but did not stick it out!” — STEPHEN COLBERTTrevor Noah’s TakeTrevor Noah also broadcast live, with his writers facing an even bigger time crunch than Colbert’s because “The Daily Show” starts earlier, at 11 p.m. Eastern. But they pulled through, delivering quips about nearly every major aspect of the speech.“Just a few minutes ago, President Trump finished the second State of the Union address — and yes, his tie was crooked when he walked in. Trump walked past 600 people and not a single one of them had the balls to tell him. In fact, at some point Mike Pence was like, [adjusts tie] ‘This is the way ties should be from now on.’ ” — TREVOR NOAHThe Trumps invited a grade-school boy named Joshua Trump, who is not related to the president but has complained of being bullied over his name, to attend the speech. Noah called it a masterful strategic move.“Inviting this kid is a pretty savvy move by Trump. It combines two major goals of his family: Melania’s campaign to stop bullying, and Donald’s campaign to replace Eric.” — TREVOR NOAHAt one point in the speech, Trump said, “If there is going to be peace and legislation, there cannot be war and investigation.” Noah found that easy to poke fun at.“O.K., that didn’t make sense, but it rhymed. I wonder if Trump just wrote a bunch of rhymes to try and stop the investigation. He was just sitting in front of the mirror like, [impersonating Trump]
‘Life is fuller without Robert Mueller! Any collusion is an illusion! If you lock up the orange … nothing rhymes with orange. O.K.’ ” — TREVOR NOAHElsewhere, Trump spoke in braggadocious terms about how Congress had more women than ever. Noah felt the need to remind the president that most of those women belong to the opposition party.“Yo, Donald Trump is a rock star, guys. He just took credit for the Democrats electing more women. That is such a rock ’n’ roll move.” — TREVOR NOAHTrump has struggled with teleprompters in the past; this time, Noah confessed to being impressed with Trump’s performance.“There was one thing we can all agree on: He read really well. Yeah, he’s really improved. Like, I don’t know if he’s ready for a second term, but he’s definitely ready for the second grade. I am so proud of him.” — TREVOR NOAHThe Punchiest Punchlines (Virginia Edition)“I saw that pretty much all the Congressional Democratic women wore white, head to toe. Take a look at that. In response, the governor of Virginia was like, ‘Oh sure! When they do it, it’s O.K.?’ ” — JIMMY FALLON“A woman in Germany is claiming to be in love with an airplane. ‘I know how to cure her!’ said Spirit Airlines.” — SETH MEYERS“Liquor brand Svedka will release a new product that combines rosé and vodka. It’s called, ‘Uh oh, hold my hair!’ ” — SETH MEYERSThe Bits Worth WatchingSpike Lee talked to Colbert about Trump’s refusal “to denounce the alt-right” after the infamous Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Va., in 2017.Here’s James Corden in a “When Harry Met Sally” parody — with Billy Crystal.What We’re Excited About on Wednesday NightBret Baier, the chief political anchor for Fox News, will sit down with Colbert. That could get interesting.Also, Check This OutImageCreditFrank Bauman, via the Museum of the City of New YorkIn honor of Jackie Robinson’s centennial, the Museum of the City of New York is showing never-before-seen photographs of the pioneering baseball player.Plus, Ideas for What to Watch Tonight:The 50 Best Movies on Netflix Right NowThe 25 Best Films of the 21st CenturyThe Best Movies on Amazon Prime Video Right NowAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsI Shouldn’t Have to Tell You This Is Racist - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexStyleSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperStyle|I Shouldn’t Have to Tell You This Is RacistAdvertisementSupported bySOCIAL Q’SI Shouldn’t Have to Tell You This Is RacistA reader wonders whether to address the black caricatures in her acquaintance’s home. By Philip GalanesFeb. 14, 2019I am an active member of my homeowners’ association. I am also African-American. While meeting at the home of the president of the association, I noticed that she had a row of African-American iconography lined up in her kitchen: a collection of ceramic “Mammy” jars. They made me uncomfortable. Do I have an obligation to say something about them? Maybe suggest that she hide away her trove of racist caricatures? Or should I follow a philosophy of “her home, her décor” and never go back? (In the past, this woman referred to my son as “one of the good ones.”)FABYYou probably know better than I, Faby, that if you took up every act of racism you encountered, you would be too busy to do anything else — like have a job or any close relationships. It’s up to you which incidents you confront and which you let be. So no, you are not obligated to catch this woman up on hundreds of years of American history and explain to her why those tchotchkes are offensive.But if you enjoy being active in your homeowners’ association (or if you have benefited by participating in it), I encourage you to speak up rather than stay away. These are business meetings, not social calls. Say to the president: “You know, those jars are racist stereotypes and perpetuate the idea of black women as servants to white people. I’d rather not see them at our official meetings.”That should do the trick. But if the president argues that the jars are harmless or merely kitsch, send her a link to the Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia at Ferris State University. Our country has produced — and continues to make — troves of racist objects. Her collectibles are no exception.ImageCreditChristoph NiemannToo CloseMy mother-in-law and her boyfriend purchased a home in our small neighborhood, despite our stated objections. We are socially active with our neighbors, and my mother-in-law told us that they intend to be, too. I anticipate lots of well-intentioned questions about their arrival. Is there a polite way to say that their move was made against our wishes? Pretending to be happy about it compounds my irritation and makes me feel disingenuous.ANONYMOUSI totally get your annoyance. But fortunately, you will not be testifying in front of Robert Mueller (or otherwise under oath) when you answer your neighbors’ questions about your in-laws. Better to be opaque than poison the well against family members in advance. (I might feel differently if your neighbors were close friends.)Say, “We’ll see how it goes.” And try to mean it. Your mother-in-law and her boyfriend seem unconcerned with honoring boundaries. On the other hand, who are you to prevent them from buying their dream home? Now that the moving vans are pulling up, focus on creating respectful barriers between your households. (Visits by appointment only!) And if you’re going to say anything about your new neighbors to the old ones, aim for optimism.Divided by DogsWe’ve had two good friends move within a four-hour radius of our house. We were thrilled about it and looked forward to having them over for weekend visits. When we invited our first friend, he asked if he could bring his dog. We said no. He declined our invitation. The same thing happened with our second friend. She cited the expense of a dog sitter, even though she does very well financially. Is there a way to encourage our friends to visit without their dogs?LISAYou mean, like bullying them into it? No. These interactions went exactly as they should have. You kindly invited your pals to visit. They proposed a wrinkle in your arrangements. You refused (perhaps because of allergies, dislike of dogs or not wanting a pet for the weekend), and so were your invitations.You had every right to behave as you did, and so did your friends. But I have noticed a trend: As digital contact outpaces face-to-face encounters for many of us, our pets can become an important physical presence in our lives. We like to be around something with a heartbeat! Don’t try to persuade your friends to cave. Suggest lunch at a midpoint between you. Perhaps your reunions will blossom from there?Thanks?Six months ago, my husband and I attended the wedding of the son of old friends. We have known the groom since he was a baby. As a gift, we gave the couple a generous check. We have not received a thank-you note. Would it be O.K. if I mention this to his parents? If this were my child, I would want to know.ANONYMOUSAssuming the groom is older than 14, I’d suggest contacting the bridal couple directly if you are worried that the check was lost in the wedding shuffle or cashed by some scurrilous third party. But calling an adult’s parents to rat him out is about as inappropriate as his not thanking you for your gift. If the couple’s behavior offends you, skip their anniversary party.For help with your awkward situation, send a question to SocialQ@nytimes.com, to Philip Galanes on Facebook or @SocialQPhilip on Twitter.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST8 of the New York edition with the headline: Americana? No, Racist. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsOpinion | For Decades, the United States and Russia Stepped Back From the Brink. Until Now. - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperOpinion|For Decades, the United States and Russia Stepped Back From the Brink. Until Now.AdvertisementOpinionSupported byFor Decades, the United States and Russia Stepped Back From the Brink. Until Now.Will there be a dangerous new era of unchecked nuclear weapons development?By The Editorial BoardThe editorial board represents the opinions of the board, its editor and the publisher. It is separate from the newsroom and the Op-Ed section.Feb. 10, 2019Image CreditCreditKelsey WrotenBefore the fear of being blown up on a plane, or a train, or a sidewalk gave millions of people sleepless nights, before the threat of global climate disaster stirred dread, nuclear annihilation was the stuff of nightmares. By the mid-1980s, the United States and the Soviet Union had amassed 63,000 nuclear weapons, with the promise of mutually assured destruction if even one were ever used, even accidentally. Then, after years of global protests and skyrocketing budgets, American and Soviet leaders
stepped back from the brink and began a process of arms control diplomacy, accelerated by the fall of the Soviet Union, that shrank those arsenals by nearly 90 percent. For decades, that process and that diplomacy continued … until now.President Trump and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, who control 90 percent of the world’s nuclear weapons, are preparing to abandon the 1987 treaty that eliminated ground-launched ballistic and cruise missiles with ranges of 310 miles to 3,100 miles. They have yet to begin serious talks on extending a 2010 treaty that reduced the nuclear warheads deployed on intercontinental ballistic missiles and other strategic systems, and the Americans, in particular, don’t appear to have any interest in doing so. Washington and Moscow are also modernizing old weapons systems and building new ones, at a cost of
$494 billion over the next decade in the United States alone. At the same time, Pakistan, India and North Korea are expanding their arsenals as the international consensus for nonproliferation erodes. Experts with The Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, who evaluate the nuclear threat, last month judged the current state of affairs to be “as worrisome as the most dangerous times of the Cold War.” The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty of 1987, which eliminated 2,692 ground-based missiles, is part of a web of arms control agreements that have managed the threat. Mr. Trump is right to blame the Russians for beginning to unravel the I.N.F. treaty during the Obama administration by testing and then deploying a cruise missile banned by the treaty. But he was wrong to assert in his State of the Union address that he had “no choice” other than to withdraw from the treaty, a move that takes effect in August.His threat to “outspend and out-innovate all others by far” in the production of weapons of mass destruction was chilling, particularly given Mr. Putin’s vow of a “symmetrical” response. “If our American partners suspend their participation in the I.N.F. treaty, so will we,” he said on Feb. 2. “And if they start working on new weapons, so will we.”It’s unlikely the treaty will be revived, given the deterioration of Russian-American relations, despite Mr. Trump’s promises of warmer ties and a coziness that has drawn the scrutiny of the special counsel Robert Mueller.The pact’s imminent collapse has intensified concerns that the United States and Russia will let the 2010 New Start agreement, with its caps on deployed nuclear warheads, intercontinental ballistic missiles and heavy bombers, as well as requirements for verification and data exchanges, expire in 2021. (Start stands for Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.) Absent an extension or a new treaty, the nuclear arsenals will become unregulated — meaning there will be no legally binding, verifiable limits on the American or Russian nuclear arsenals — for the first time since 1972.Adding to the uncertainty, Mr. Putin has warned that Russia is developing new “invincible” hypersonic missiles that will travel at more than five times the speed of sound.The United States, meanwhile, is developing a new conventionally armed intermediate-range missile that could one day be deployed in Europe. By the end of the year, Washington may be ready to field a low-yield nuclear weapon that could make it easier to use nuclear weapons without courting Armageddon. Last month, Mr. Trump threatened to unsettle the nuclear landscape even further by promising to reinvent American missile defenses, a quixotic vision reminiscent of President Ronald Reagan’s unfulfilled “Star Wars” program.
Mr. Reagan appreciated the dangers of nuclear war and the value of negotiated agreements that could reduce weapons. The New Start numbers can go even lower. It has been over seven years since the two powers held serious nuclear arms reductions talks. The United States, its allies, even the Russians will be less safe if that process atrophies.With Democrats now in control of the House, the new chairman of its Armed Services Committee, Adam Smith of Washington, plans to hold what could be the most fundamental public examination of American nuclear doctrine in decades.If Mr. Trump continues to push for an expanded nuclear arsenal and abandons the strategic arms accord, Congress should freeze the nuclear modernization budget and block funding for new weapons.The commitment to spend billions of dollars to upgrade the aging nuclear arsenal was part of the Faustian bargain President Barack Obama made with Senate Republicans to win support for the New Start pact. He did so with the hope that it would help lead, eventually, to a world with no nuclear weapons. Outspending Russia on a nuclear arms race, as Mr. Trump has bragged he would do, or abandoning an arms control regime that has helped forestall nuclear war for decades, is a foolish game of chicken, with no possible winners. The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: No Winner in a New Arms Race. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsOpinion | For Decades, the United States and Russia Stepped Back From the Brink. Until Now. - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperOpinion|For Decades, the United States and Russia Stepped Back From the Brink. Until Now.AdvertisementOpinionSupported byFor Decades, the United States and Russia Stepped Back From the Brink. Until Now.Will there be a dangerous new era of unchecked nuclear weapons development?By The Editorial BoardThe editorial board represents the opinions of the board, its editor and the publisher. It is separate from the newsroom and the Op-Ed section.Feb. 10, 2019Image CreditCreditKelsey WrotenBefore the fear of being blown up on a plane, or a train, or a sidewalk gave millions of people sleepless nights, before the threat of global climate disaster stirred dread, nuclear annihilation was the stuff of nightmares. By the mid-1980s, the United States and the Soviet Union had amassed 63,000 nuclear weapons, with the promise of mutually assured destruction if even one were ever used, even accidentally. Then, after years of global protests and skyrocketing budgets, American and Soviet leaders
stepped back from the brink and began a process of arms control diplomacy, accelerated by the fall of the Soviet Union, that shrank those arsenals by nearly 90 percent. For decades, that process and that diplomacy continued … until now.President Trump and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, who control 90 percent of the world’s nuclear weapons, are preparing to abandon the 1987 treaty that eliminated ground-launched ballistic and cruise missiles with ranges of 310 miles to 3,100 miles. They have yet to begin serious talks on extending a 2010 treaty that reduced the nuclear warheads deployed on intercontinental ballistic missiles and other strategic systems, and the Americans, in particular, don’t appear to have any interest in doing so. Washington and Moscow are also modernizing old weapons systems and building new ones, at a cost of
$494 billion over the next decade in the United States alone. At the same time, Pakistan, India and North Korea are expanding their arsenals as the international consensus for nonproliferation erodes. Experts with The Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, who evaluate the nuclear threat, last month judged the current state of affairs to be “as worrisome as the most dangerous times of the Cold War.” The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty of 1987, which eliminated 2,692 ground-based missiles, is part of a web of arms control agreements that have managed the threat. Mr. Trump is right to blame the Russians for beginning to unravel the I.N.F. treaty during the Obama administration by testing and then deploying a cruise missile banned by the treaty. But he was wrong to assert in his State of the Union address that he had “no choice” other than to withdraw from the treaty, a move that takes effect in August.His threat to “outspend and out-innovate all others by far” in the production of weapons of mass destruction was chilling, particularly given Mr. Putin’s vow of a “symmetrical” response. “If our American partners suspend their participation in the I.N.F. treaty, so will we,” he said on Feb. 2. “And if they start working on new weapons, so will we.”It’s unlikely the treaty will be revived, given the deterioration of Russian-American relations, despite Mr. Trump’s promises of warmer ties and a coziness that has drawn the scrutiny of the special counsel Robert Mueller.The pact’s imminent collapse has intensified concerns that the United States and Russia will let the 2010 New Start agreement, with its caps on deployed nuclear warheads, intercontinental ballistic missiles and heavy bombers, as well as requirements for verification and data exchanges, expire in 2021. (Start stands for Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.) Absent an extension or a new treaty, the nuclear arsenals will become unregulated — meaning there will be no legally binding, verifiable limits on the American or Russian nuclear arsenals — for the first time since 1972.Adding to the uncertainty, Mr. Putin has warned that Russia is developing new “invincible” hypersonic missiles that will travel at more than five times the speed of sound.The United States, meanwhile, is developing a new conventionally armed intermediate-range missile that could one day be deployed in Europe. By the end of the year, Washington may be ready to field a low-yield nuclear weapon that could make it easier to use nuclear weapons without courting Armageddon. Last month, Mr. Trump threatened to unsettle the nuclear landscape even further by promising to reinvent American missile defenses, a quixotic vision reminiscent of President Ronald Reagan’s unfulfilled “Star Wars” program.
Mr. Reagan appreciated the dangers of nuclear war and the value of negotiated agreements that could reduce weapons. The New Start numbers can go even lower. It has been over seven years since the two powers held serious nuclear arms reductions talks. The United States, its allies, even the Russians will be less safe if that process atrophies.With Democrats now in control of the House, the new chairman of its Armed Services Committee, Adam Smith of Washington, plans to hold what could be the most fundamental public examination of American nuclear doctrine in decades.If Mr. Trump continues to push for an expanded nuclear arsenal and abandons the strategic arms accord, Congress should freeze the nuclear modernization budget and block funding for new weapons.The commitment to spend billions of dollars to upgrade the aging nuclear arsenal was part of the Faustian bargain President Barack Obama made with Senate Republicans to win support for the New Start pact. He did so with the hope that it would help lead, eventually, to a world with no nuclear weapons. Outspending Russia on a nuclear arms race, as Mr. Trump has bragged he would do, or abandoning an arms control regime that has helped forestall nuclear war for decades, is a foolish game of chicken, with no possible winners. The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: No Winner in a New Arms Race. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsRoger Stone’s Costume Drama - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexFashionSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperFashion|Roger Stone’s Costume DramaAdvertisementSupported byOn the RunwayRoger Stone’s Costume Drama The political operative has been modeling a primer on how to dress for court.ImageRoger Stone at federal court on Friday.CreditCreditPablo Martinez Monsivais/Associated PressBy Vanessa FriedmanFeb. 1, 2019Roger J. Stone Jr. set foot on the stage — sorry, the floor of the federal court in Washington — on Friday for his scheduling hearing in a somber pinstriped ocean-dark suit, matching dark tie, pristine white shirt and muted pocket handkerchief, bringing to a temporary close the latest installment of what may become one of the most-watched spinoffs of the reality show known as “The Trump Administration.”It was a veritable replay of what Mr. Stone, the political operative and former Trump adviser, chose to wear for his earlier court appearance, on Tuesday (a single-breasted three-button navy suit, pure white shirt with a Windsor collar, white pocket handkerchief and marine blue knit tie). That itself was a more formal version of the navy polo shirt with white polo pony and dark jeans Mr. Stone had worn last Friday, when he was arrested on seven counts of obstruction, witness tampering and making false statements. He appeared after the indictment with both arms raised in a Nixonian victory sign.ImageMr. Stone after his indictment on Jan. 25.CreditJoe Raedle/Getty ImagesWhy do such costumes matter?Because Mr. Stone has long treated — and referred to — his wardrobe as exactly that: a key part of the theater of his life in politics. This is, after all, a man who wore full morning dress to the 2017 inauguration; who is famous for his penchant for bespoke double-breasted suits from Savile Row or Alan Flusser (a tailor known for his master-of-the-universe clients); who once joked that he had more shoes than Imelda Marcos; and who called himself a “showman” in his 2018 book, “Stone’s Rules: How to Win at Politics, Business, and Style.” Someone who believes fully in the power of clothing as communications tool, and is comfortable admitting it. Crowing about it, even.ImageMr. Stone in front of his tie collection in 2015.CreditJesse Dittmar for The New York TimesAnd because in court, defendants generally don’t talk. Their lawyers, their demeanor and their clothes talk for them. Given that Judge Amy Berman Jackson is still considering a gag order preventing Mr. Stone (who spent his time between hearings giving news conferences and making appearances) from discussing his case publicly, it’s possible that at some point he won’t be able to speak out of court either. Which puts an even greater burden on what he wears to start emoting in his place.So what does it mean that Mr. Stone, who runs a best- and worst-dressed list of his own, has suddenly adopted a sartorial stance of relative (on the Stone spectrum) understatement?First, that nothing he is wearing was chosen by accident, not even the polo and jeans. After all, he well understands that, as he wrote in “Stone’s Rules”: “An impression is made based on how you are dressed. It’s how you present yourself, how the world sees you.” (Of the 140 rules in the book, 54 are overtly about clothes.)Just as he presumably understands that if ever a president cared about how costumes play, it is Mr. Trump (generals! straight from central casting!). Who in a recent interview with The New York Times happened to refer to Mr. Stone as a “character.” And that Mr. Stone well understands that the president — someone who does not like his deputies to steal his spotlight, holds the power of the small screen dear and has the power of the pardon — will be watching.ImageMr. Stone leaving court after his arraignment hearing on Jan. 29.CreditZach Gibson/Getty ImagesIn which case, No. 30 of “Stone’s Rules” comes into play: “A well-cut dark blue suit is required for any public performance where credibility and authority are key.” Probably the current situation qualifies.Indeed, not long after his Tuesday court visit, Mr. Stone appeared in a somewhat surprising video posted on the YouTube channel of the Daily Caller, the conservative website co-founded by Tucker Carlson where he also has a fashion column (Stone on Style), in which he announced, “You have to think long and hard about what you’re going to wear before your arraignment.” He talked everyone through the choices he made, including cuff links, pocket square and underwear (the latter perhaps falling into the category of too much information).He went so far as to reveal in that video that he chose not to wear one of his many made-to-measure double-breasted suits (he is partial to pinstripes and plaid) because they were “a little too wealthy looking and I am dirt poor at this point, having been destroyed financially by a two-year inquisition by Robert Mueller.” Then he told everyone that the three-button suit he did go for was 30 years old. And while he acknowledged the potential foppish touch of the pocket hankie, he called the one he picked “pedestrian,” perhaps to lessen the effect.The theory has some merit. If one is trying to communicate truthfulness and transparency, as Mr. Stone’s previous statements would suggest is his aim, then he is correct in saying that dressing in the clothes of the skyscraper set — the kind that suggest bourbon in cut crystal glasses on the way to a private plane with butter-soft leather seats — is probably not the way to start. On the other hand, the navy-and-white combo he has adopted as a quasi uniform, which in color theory has associations with true blue loyalty and innocence, tells a different story. And, in wearing what he has written about, arguably, he is demonstrating the courage of his convictions. Still, by Friday Mr. Stone seemed to have changed his mind about the single- versus double-breasted idea. Perhaps because he has also admitted that his double-breasted suits are his “armor,” and right now he needs as much of that as he can get.Vanessa Friedman is The Times's fashion director and chief fashion critic. She was previously the fashion editor of the Financial Times.
@VVFriedman A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Stylish Performance, Measured for the Occasion. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsRoger Stone’s Costume Drama - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexFashionSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperFashion|Roger Stone’s Costume DramaAdvertisementSupported byOn the RunwayRoger Stone’s Costume Drama The political operative has been modeling a primer on how to dress for court.ImageRoger Stone at federal court on Friday.CreditCreditPablo Martinez Monsivais/Associated PressBy Vanessa FriedmanFeb. 1, 2019Roger J. Stone Jr. set foot on the stage — sorry, the floor of the federal court in Washington — on Friday for his scheduling hearing in a somber pinstriped ocean-dark suit, matching dark tie, pristine white shirt and muted pocket handkerchief, bringing to a temporary close the latest installment of what may become one of the most-watched spinoffs of the reality show known as “The Trump Administration.”It was a veritable replay of what Mr. Stone, the political operative and former Trump adviser, chose to wear for his earlier court appearance, on Tuesday (a single-breasted three-button navy suit, pure white shirt with a Windsor collar, white pocket handkerchief and marine blue knit tie). That itself was a more formal version of the navy polo shirt with white polo pony and dark jeans Mr. Stone had worn last Friday, when he was arrested on seven counts of obstruction, witness tampering and making false statements. He appeared after the indictment with both arms raised in a Nixonian victory sign.ImageMr. Stone after his indictment on Jan. 25.CreditJoe Raedle/Getty ImagesWhy do such costumes matter?Because Mr. Stone has long treated — and referred to — his wardrobe as exactly that: a key part of the theater of his life in politics. This is, after all, a man who wore full morning dress to the 2017 inauguration; who is famous for his penchant for bespoke double-breasted suits from Savile Row or Alan Flusser (a tailor known for his master-of-the-universe clients); who once joked that he had more shoes than Imelda Marcos; and who called himself a “showman” in his 2018 book, “Stone’s Rules: How to Win at Politics, Business, and Style.” Someone who believes fully in the power of clothing as communications tool, and is comfortable admitting it. Crowing about it, even.ImageMr. Stone in front of his tie collection in 2015.CreditJesse Dittmar for The New York TimesAnd because in court, defendants generally don’t talk. Their lawyers, their demeanor and their clothes talk for them. Given that Judge Amy Berman Jackson is still considering a gag order preventing Mr. Stone (who spent his time between hearings giving news conferences and making appearances) from discussing his case publicly, it’s possible that at some point he won’t be able to speak out of court either. Which puts an even greater burden on what he wears to start emoting in his place.So what does it mean that Mr. Stone, who runs a best- and worst-dressed list of his own, has suddenly adopted a sartorial stance of relative (on the Stone spectrum) understatement?First, that nothing he is wearing was chosen by accident, not even the polo and jeans. After all, he well understands that, as he wrote in “Stone’s Rules”: “An impression is made based on how you are dressed. It’s how you present yourself, how the world sees you.” (Of the 140 rules in the book, 54 are overtly about clothes.)Just as he presumably understands that if ever a president cared about how costumes play, it is Mr. Trump (generals! straight from central casting!). Who in a recent interview with The New York Times happened to refer to Mr. Stone as a “character.” And that Mr. Stone well understands that the president — someone who does not like his deputies to steal his spotlight, holds the power of the small screen dear and has the power of the pardon — will be watching.ImageMr. Stone leaving court after his arraignment hearing on Jan. 29.CreditZach Gibson/Getty ImagesIn which case, No. 30 of “Stone’s Rules” comes into play: “A well-cut dark blue suit is required for any public performance where credibility and authority are key.” Probably the current situation qualifies.Indeed, not long after his Tuesday court visit, Mr. Stone appeared in a somewhat surprising video posted on the YouTube channel of the Daily Caller, the conservative website co-founded by Tucker Carlson where he also has a fashion column (Stone on Style), in which he announced, “You have to think long and hard about what you’re going to wear before your arraignment.” He talked everyone through the choices he made, including cuff links, pocket square and underwear (the latter perhaps falling into the category of too much information).He went so far as to reveal in that video that he chose not to wear one of his many made-to-measure double-breasted suits (he is partial to pinstripes and plaid) because they were “a little too wealthy looking and I am dirt poor at this point, having been destroyed financially by a two-year inquisition by Robert Mueller.” Then he told everyone that the three-button suit he did go for was 30 years old. And while he acknowledged the potential foppish touch of the pocket hankie, he called the one he picked “pedestrian,” perhaps to lessen the effect.The theory has some merit. If one is trying to communicate truthfulness and transparency, as Mr. Stone’s previous statements would suggest is his aim, then he is correct in saying that dressing in the clothes of the skyscraper set — the kind that suggest bourbon in cut crystal glasses on the way to a private plane with butter-soft leather seats — is probably not the way to start. On the other hand, the navy-and-white combo he has adopted as a quasi uniform, which in color theory has associations with true blue loyalty and innocence, tells a different story. And, in wearing what he has written about, arguably, he is demonstrating the courage of his convictions. Still, by Friday Mr. Stone seemed to have changed his mind about the single- versus double-breasted idea. Perhaps because he has also admitted that his double-breasted suits are his “armor,” and right now he needs as much of that as he can get.Vanessa Friedman is The Times's fashion director and chief fashion critic. She was previously the fashion editor of the Financial Times.
@VVFriedman A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Stylish Performance, Measured for the Occasion. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsPainting Socialists as Villains, Trump Refreshes a Blueprint - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Painting Socialists as Villains, Trump Refreshes a BlueprintAdvertisementSupported byWhite House MemoPainting Socialists as Villains, Trump Refreshes a BlueprintVideoHandshakes. Applause. Singing. It all happened at this year’s State of the Union. Now, we’re tallying up what went down.CreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesBy Michael TackettFeb. 6, 2019WASHINGTON — President Trump has proved himself adroit at creating villains to serve as his political foils. In his State of the Union address on Tuesday, he introduced a new one: socialists.Right after his calls to support the overthrow of Venezuela’s president, Nicolás Maduro, and condemning the “socialist policies” that have reduced the country “into a state of abject poverty and despair,” he made a quick segue to the home front.“Here in the United States, we are alarmed by new calls to adopt socialism in our country,” the president said, adding, “Tonight, we resolve that America will never be a socialist country.”Tuesday night’s speech contained more than a few suggestions of what Mr. Trump’s 2020 campaign could look like. The president dwelled on the economy, pointing to the low unemployment rate, continuing growth and the tax cut passed by the last Republican Congress. He spoke of trying to reduce prescription drug costs and battling H.I.V., perhaps with an eye to the kinds of suburban female voters who deserted Republicans in the midterm elections. And for his hard-core followers, he argued for the border wall.The threat of socialism was something new. But it could become the kind of rhetorical touchstone of his re-election campaign that sounding the alarm about “criminal illegal aliens” was in 2016.If it does, it could provide Mr. Trump with a potentially effective weapon in confronting an increasingly aggressive and more liberal Democratic Party, defining it through attacks on Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, who describe themselves as democratic socialists, and other members of the party pushing progressive policies like a 70 percent tax rate and “Medicare for all.”The president’s economic advisers began sounding the socialist alarm in the fall in a 72-page report criticizing what it described as the socialist ideas of leading Democrats, linking them with the failed economic policies of communist governments in China, the former Soviet Union and other countries. The word “socialism” appeared 144 times — on average, twice a page.The report by the White House Council of Economic Advisers, “The Opportunity Costs of Socialism,” did not prescribe any action but was meant to serve as a warning about the destructive economic policies that Mr. Trump believes Democrats would inflict on the United States.Policies like tuition-free college were mentioned in the same ominous tone as the atrocities committed by Vladimir Lenin and Mao Zedong. The report suggested that Democratic policies emulating Venezuela would cause the American economy to shrink by 40 percent, just as Mr. Trump did on Tuesday night.Yet there is no evidence of any growing public angst about socialism sweeping the United States. As a political philosophy and organizing tool, it took modest root in the country in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but never gained widespread appeal. Eugene V. Debs, a labor leader from Terre Haute, Ind., was a five-time candidate for president, never to great effect, peaking at 6 percent of the vote in 1912.“You really have not had a self-consciously socialist movement of any size and influence since the 1930s,” said Michael Kazin, a professor of history at Georgetown University and the author of a history of the American left. “Clearly this is an attempt to portray Democrats as too radical for Americans and to connect them to Venezuela, which is of course a clever thing do since Venezuela is falling apart under an ostensibly socialist government.”But the supposed threat of creeping socialism — and the dangers posed by someone like Ms. Ocasio-Cortez — have become favorite talking points for conservatives like the TV personality Sean Hannity of Fox News, who tells his viewers that far-left socialism had taken over the Democratic Party. Mr. Trump is now firmly aligned with that view.“Most Americans are obviously not up on the distinctions between democratic socialists and communists,” Mr. Kazin said. “He, like other conservatives who had talked about the so-called Red Menace over the years, is trying to confuse the two things in people’s minds.”But that is not how conservatives look at the way Mr. Trump seems ready to portray Democrats.“From a political standpoint, he is defending free enterprise, free markets and freedom,” said Greg Mueller, a conservative strategist. “They want to take the country toward socialism and their party is divided on that and there is a major fight in their party over whether to be a socialist party.“This is a great debate for Trump to define in 2019 and the 2020 campaign,” he added.Republicans, with limited success, tried at times to label President Barack Obama a socialist, particularly for his call for higher taxes on the wealthy, Mr. Kazin said, noting that this effort coincided with a shift in public opinion where Americans viewed socialism more favorably.But a Gallup poll in August showed that Democrats had a more positive view of socialism than they do of capitalism, 57 percent to 47 percent. Their view has been relatively stable since 2010, but attitudes toward capitalism have become more negative, coinciding with the financial crisis that fueled animus toward the large banks and investment firms blamed for the economic devastation.Among Americans ages 18 to 29, the Gallup poll found, 51 percent were positive about socialism while 45 percent viewed capitalism favorably. Gallup noted there was a marked, 12-point decline in younger adults views on capitalism is just two years.“Every single policy proposal that we have adopted and presented to the American people has been overwhelmingly popular,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez told MSNBC late Tuesday. And she dismissed Mr. Trump’s criticism. “He feels himself losing on the issues,” she said, and now must engage in ad hominem attacks.But it was no accident that Mr. Trump chose to introduce the socialist menace in perhaps the highest-profile setting available to a president as the first step in trying to paint Democrats as too far left, just as they start to engage in a presidential nominating process that will shape the party’s image.And even some of the president’s harshest critics say he may be on to something.“The idea of throwing the socialist thing out there politically is pretty crafty because, truly, there is just enough truth in there to make it sticky and interesting,” said Mike Murphy, a Republican strategist and longtime Trump critic. “They are lurching left. For once, somehow, a little honesty crept into one of Trump’s proclamations. It’s code for the loony left.”Correction: Feb. 7, 2019An earlier version of this article misstated the year in which Eugene V. Debs won 6 percent of the vote for president. It was 1912, not 1916.Follow Michael Tackett on Twitter: @tackettdc. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Framing Socialists as Villains,
Trump Refreshes His Blueprint. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageTrump Once Said Power Was About Instilling Fear. In That Case, He Should Be Worried.Feb. 4, 2019ImageTrump Again Warns He May Declare National Emergency to Build WallJan. 9, 2019ImageA ‘Game of Thrones’-Style Poster Overshadowed a Trump Cabinet Meeting. Nobody Talked About It.Jan. 3, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsOpinion | The Political Magic of Us vs. Them - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperOpinion|The Political Magic of Us vs. ThemAdvertisementOpinionSupported byThe Political Magic of Us vs. ThemEncouraging and exploiting division has worked for Trump, as far as his own electoral prospects are concerned. Can he keep it up?By Thomas B. EdsallMr. Edsall contributes a weekly column from Washington, D.C. on politics, demographics and inequality.Feb. 13, 2019ImageCreditCreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesHowever often President Trump strays from his favored political strategy, he faithfully returns to it like a dog to a bone: first, polarize the American electorate along racial, cultural and economic lines, then exploit the schisms that have supplanted the class divisions that were once central to both American and European partisan politics.On one side of the divide are those whom the political scientists Pippa Norris and Ronald Inglehart describe in a 2016 paper as comfortable with “an inexorable cultural escalator moving postindustrial societies steadily in a more progressive direction.” This new direction amounts to what the authors callan intergenerational shift toward post-materialist values, such as cosmopolitanism and multiculturalism, generating rising support for left-libertarian parties such as the Greens and other progressive movements advocating environmental protection, human rights, and gender equality.On the other side, Norris and Inglehart write, is a counterrevolution, aretro backlash, especially among the older generation, white men, and less educated sectors, who sense decline and actively reject the rising tide of progressive values, resent the displacement of familiar traditional norms, and provide a pool of supporters potentially vulnerable to populist appeals.Economic distress, they argue, reinforces cultural alienation to produce fertile terrain for Trump. “Fears of economic insecurity, including the individual experience of the loss of secure, well-paid blue-collar jobs, and the collective experience of living in declining communities of the left-behinds” combine to make votersmore susceptible to the anti-establishment appeals of authoritarian-populist actors, offering simple slogans blaming “Them” for stripping prosperity, job opportunities, and public services from “Us.” The collision of these forces has produced the emergence of an American authoritarianism. In their book, “Cultural Backlash: Trump, Brexit and Authoritarian Populism,” which comes out later this week, Norris and Inglehart write that Trump has assumed leadership of this authoritarian movement,defined as a cluster of values prioritizing collective security for the group at the expense of liberal autonomy for the individual. Authoritarian values prioritize three core components: 1) the importance of security against risks of instability and disorder (foreigners stealing our jobs, immigrants attacking our women, terrorists threatening our safety); 2) the value of group conformity to preserve conventional traditions and to guard our way of life (defending “Us” against threats to “European values”); and 3) the need for loyal obedience toward strong leaders who protect the group and its customs (“I alone can fix it," “Believe me,” “Are you on my team?").The United States and many European countries, at various points in the last decade, have reached a critical juncture, Norris and Inglehart write: “The interwar generation, non-college graduates, the working class, white Europeans, the more religious, men and residents of rural communities” have come to feel “estranged from the silent revolution in social and moral values, left behind by cultural tides that they deeply reject.” These men and women, “until recently the politically and socially dominant group in Western cultures,” reacheda tipping point at which their hegemonic status, power and privilege is fading. Their values make them potential supporters for parties and leaders promising to restore national sovereignty (Make America Great Again), restrict immigration and multicultural diversity (Build a Wall) and defend traditional religious and conventional moral values.The debate over whether the rise of right-wing populism is driven by cultural anxiety, racism, ethnocentricity or economic deprivation may “be somewhat artificial,” Norris and Inglehart contend becauseinteractive processes may possibly link these factors, if structural changes in the work force and social trends in globalized markets heighten economic insecurity, and if this, in turn, stimulates a negative backlash among traditionalists toward cultural shifts. It may not be an either/or question, but one of relative emphasis with interactive effects.In this country, the nominally class-based politics of the New Deal fractured when working class non-college whites felt abandoned by a Democratic Party that shed its pre-civil rights, segregationist southern wing and that by the 1970s had adopted a culturally and racially liberal agenda. Over the past five decades, these white voters have formed the core of the populist right. Conversely, minorities, many of whom face the same economic hardships as working class whites, if not worse, are firmly aligned with the party of social and cultural liberalism and racial equality, the Democratic Party.“The new cultural cleavage dividing Populists and Cosmopolitan Liberals,” Norris and Inglehart write, is “orthogonal to the classic economic class cleavage” — in other words, the new division cuts across and splits the old economic class solidarity.Data from a preliminary American National Election Studies survey — provided to me by Matthew DeBell, a scholar at Stanford’s Institute for Research in the Social Sciences — revealed the strength of this new cleavage. The survey asked 2,500 men and women to rank their feelings toward Trump on a “feeling thermometer” scale of zero, “very cold or unfavorable,” to 100, “very warm or favorable.”The results illustrate that the population is even more divided between those who love and those who hate Trump than we might think. Sixty-one percent had either extremely hostile or very positive feelings toward the president.Alan Abramowitz, a political scientist at Emory University, analyzed the responses to the survey. He wrote me that nearly two out of five of those surveyed, 38 percent, put Trump in the coldest range, 5 degrees or lower. 23 percent, put him in the warmest range, 95 degrees or higher. If the definition of extreme is expanded to encompass those who rank Trump from 0 to 10 and from 90 to 100, the total grows to 72 percent — 44 percent at 10 degrees or lower, 28 percent 90 degrees or higher.Abramowitz noted that “Trump is the most polarizing president in the history of ANES polling and Gallup polling.”Not only is Trump the most polarizing president, he has monopolized public attention and managed to make himself the object of both loathing and adoration.“The 2020 elections will certainly be all about Trump, assuming he is on the ballot and to a considerable extent even if he is not,” Gary Jacobson, a political scientist at the University of California-San Diego, wrote me in an email. “The 2018 election was all about Trump even though he was not on the ballot.”Stanley Feldman, a political scientist at Stony Brook University, elaborated on Trump’s self-generated centrality in an email:While Democrats and Republicans were already quite polarized before Trump ran for the presidency, I don’t think there is any question that he has contributed to further polarization. It is increasingly difficult to find people who don’t feel strongly about him.Trump, Feldman noted,taps into some fundamental issues in contemporary American politics — race/ethnicity, social issues, nationalism — and his rhetoric — clearly designed to appeal to his base — turns off many of those who are not with him on those issues. When you do little or nothing to broaden your support beyond your core voters you will generate extreme affective reactions.Feldman posed the question:Will this make the 2020 election largely about Trump? To a great extent yes, though the answer to that will depend in part on who the Democratic candidate is. As we saw in 2016, negative reactions to Hillary Clinton contributed to the outcome of that election.Feldman’s point about Clinton leads to the next question. As the Democratic selection of a nominee begins in earnest, one issue threatens the cohesion of the center-left coalition: whether the party should support expansive liberal initiatives like Medicare for All, a sharp hike in tax rates on the rich and a Green New Deal or whether it should stake out the center.Columnists who lean toward the center themselves have been particularly sharp in their criticism of the leftward movement of the party.“Democrats Are Boosting Trump’s Re-election Prospects,” read the headline of a National Journal article last week by Josh Kraushaar: Their top 2020 presidential hopefuls are embracing socialist-minded economic policy, from a Green New Deal to single-payer health insurance. It’s playing right into the president’s hands.Gerald Seib, a columnist at The Wall Street Journal, wrote earlier this week that “Democrats have arrived at a moment of great opportunity, but also of great peril.”Increasingly, he argued, the party has becomeidentified with policy proposals that are easy for Republicans to caricature as left-wing extremism. It is a fair bet that a majority of congressional Democrats don’t support either a 70 percent top tax rate or an across-the-board wealth tax on the richest Americans.In addition, Seib noted, “the party is beginning to experience the consequences of a zero-tolerance attitude on perceived misbehavior.”According to Seib, “Democrats face this question: Could they manage to scare off that center just as it has become so available?” The risk, Seib wrote,is that centrist voters will think they see that an angry left wing taking charge. Democrats could appear to be succumbing to the national mood of anger, when the better image might be of hope.In his State of the Union address on Feb. 5, Trump laid the groundwork for an assault on Democrats, declaring:Here, in the United States, we are alarmed by new calls to adopt socialism in our country. America was founded on liberty and independence — not government coercion, domination, and control. We are born free, and we will stay free. Tonight, we renew our resolve that America will never be a socialist country.I asked Brian Schaffner, a political scientist at Tufts who is one of the directors of the Cooperative Congressional Election Study, whether Democratic primary voters are pushing presidential candidates to take stands on issues further to the left than the general electorate would accept.Contrary to the view of many political analysts, Schaffner countered with data suggesting that this is not the case.“I actually don’t think Democratic primary voters are substantially more liberal than Democrats more broadly,” he wrote, adding that many of the party’s new policy initiatives are, in fact, “favored by a majority of those who voted in 2016.”He cited the following results from the 2016 Cooperative Congressional Election Study survey.Who favored granting legal status to immigrants? Democratic primary voters: 79 percent support; Democrats in general: 77 percent support; all voters: 55 percent support.Who would require minimum amounts of renewable energy? Democratic primary voters: 85 percent support; Democrats in general: 80 percent support; all voters: 61 percent support.Ban assault rifles? Democratic primary voters: 91 percent support; Democrats in general: 84 percent support; all voters: 64 percent.Eliminate mandatory minimum sentences for nonviolent offenders? Democratic primary voters: 84 percent support; Democrats in general: 78 percent support; all voters: 67 percent.How about raising the minimum wage to $12 per hour? Democratic primary voters: 92 percent support; Democrats in general: 90 percent support; all voters: 65 percent.Along similar lines, four political scientists, John Sides and Christopher Warshaw of George Washington University, and Lynn Vavreck and Chris Tausanovitch of UCLA, write in a March 2018 paper, “On the Representativeness of Primary Electorates” that “primary voters are frequently characterized as an ideologically extreme subset of their party, and thus partially responsible for increasing party polarization in government.” On the contrary, they find “that primary voters are similar to rank and file voters in their party” and thus “the composition of primary electorates does not exert a polarizing effect above what might arise from voters in the party as a whole.”Jacobson of UCSD strongly agreed, arguing that Democrats’ intense dislike of Trump will make them willing to forgive a candidate who fails to adopt all their favored policies if the candidate looks like a winner:Most Democrats will have as their prime goal — far more important than positions taken by the candidates — making sure Trump does not have a second term.The national election survey cited above reveals the depth of the electorate’s divisions on a range of issues in the Trump era.On what may prove to the crucial subject of debate over the next two — impeachment — the public is split.The survey found that a 42.1 plurality favors impeachment, including 24.9 percent who favor it strongly. A slightly smaller 38 percent oppose impeachment, including 30 percent who oppose it strongly. 19.9 percent did not take a stand.Americans are evenly divided in their assessment of Trump’s repeated denials that neither he nor his campaign ever coordinated with Russia to defeat Hillary Clinton. According to the survey, 49.9 percent agreed with the statement “Donald Trump’s 2016 campaign probably coordinated with the Russians,” while 50.1 percent said the campaign “probably did not coordinate.”One of Trump’s signature claims during the 2016 campaign was the promise that he would “drain the swamp” of corruption in the nation’s capital. That promise, according the public, is not holding up well.The survey asked “Has corruption in government increased, decreased, or stayed the same since Donald Trump became president?” The result? More than half, 54 percent, said corruption has increased under Trump, including 26.6 percent who said it has increased “a great deal.” 28 percent said the level of corruption remains unchanged, and 18.4 percent said corruption had decreased. 3.1 percent said corruption had decreased “a great deal.”Trump has railed against the Mueller investigation since it began, calling it an “illegal Joseph McCarthy style Witch Hunt.” Asked about the Mueller investigation, 45.1 of those surveyed said they approved, 16.6 points more than the 28.5 percent who said they disapproved, 19.7 percent “extremely strongly.” 28.4 percent had no opinion.Trump has pushed the authoritarian envelope further than any president (or major party presidential candidate) in recent memory.Let’s turn back to Gary Jacobson. “As long as Trump is on the scene, the nation is bound to remain deeply divided,” Jacobson writes in “Extreme Referendum: Donald Trump and the 2018 Midterm Elections,” which will appear in a forthcoming issue of Political Science Quarterly:To the extent that he reshapes the Republican Party in his white nationalist image, these divisions will deepen further and every election, like the 2018 midterms, will be fought with both sides convinced that nothing less than the future of American democracy is at stake.Norris and Inglehart suggest that the dependence of the populist right on older voters may lead to its steady decline as those voters die off, but they are not confident that this will happen. “It remains to be seen how resilient liberal democracy will be in Western societies, or whether it will be damaged irreparably by authoritarian populist forces” they write at the conclusion of their book. “The problem is not just Trump, nor is it just America. It reflects pervasive economic and cultural changes, for which there are no easy answers.”The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Thomas B. Edsall has been a contributor to The Times Opinion section since 2011. His column on strategic and demographic trends in American politics appears every Wednesday. He previously covered politics for The Washington Post.
@edsall AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsCan the Grammys Please Anyone? - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexMusicSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperMusic|Can the Grammys Please Anyone?AdvertisementSupported byCan the Grammys Please Anyone?ImageFrom left: Album of the year nominees Cardi B, Brandi Carlile, Drake, H.E.R., Post Malone, Janelle Monáe, Kacey Musgraves and Kendrick Lamar.CreditCreditPhotographs by ReutersBy Ben SisarioFeb. 7, 2019The Grammy Awards are supposed to be music’s biggest party. But in recent years the show has also become a piñata for critics, activists and even major artists over a host of issues like race and gender — and, oh yes, music.The 61st annual show, to be hosted by Alicia Keys and broadcast live by CBS on Sunday night, should be no different.After a bruising time last year, when the show came under fire after just one woman won a solo award on the air — and the chief executive of the Recording Academy, Neil Portnow, commented that women in music should “step up” to advance their careers — the Grammys made a series of changes in their membership and nominations process that were meant to address their underlying problems.But in many ways the Grammys still walk a tightrope. And as the show tries to stay culturally relevant, while also balancing the demands of race and gender representation, it may be impossible to please everybody at once.“That moment kind of shed a light on an issue that needed attention, and that is a lack of diversity in the industry,” Portnow said in an interview this week. “And if the light that was shed becomes a catalyst for change, then you can feel that it had a reason and a value.”To viewers, one of the clearest changes will be that eight, instead of five, acts will now compete in the four major categories: album, record and song of the year, and best new artist. That change satisfied many critics by adding more women to the mix, but it also has made the contests harder to handicap.For album of the year, Drake and Kendrick Lamar, two deities of contemporary hip-hop, are up against Post Malone, who has topped the charts with a mellow style between rapping and singing; the boisterous rap of Cardi B; the adventurous R&B of Janelle Monáe and H.E.R.; and two singer-songwriters in the country and folk spheres, Kacey Musgraves and Brandi Carlile.If Carlile prevails, she would be the award’s first openly gay winner. But as an artist with minimal sales, would her victory make the Grammys seem out of touch with the masses? Will a rapper win, or will they cancel one another out on the ballot?There is also a chance that the award could go to Drake or Lamar only to have the winner not show up. That has become a growing risk for the Grammys as the show has alienated more and more hip-hop and R&B stars — like Drake, Kanye West, Jay-Z and Frank Ocean — by failing to give them the most prestigious prizes.“The fact of the matter is, we continue to have a problem in the hip-hop world,” said Ken Ehrlich, the longtime producer of the show. “When they don’t take home the big prize, the regard of the academy, and what the Grammys represent, continues to be less meaningful to the hip-hop community, which is sad.”Ehrlich said that this year he offered performance slots on the show to Drake, Lamar and Childish Gambino — whose song “This Is America” is up for four awards, including record and song of the year — but they all declined. Representatives of those three artists declined to comment on whether they would attend the show.More bad news for the Grammys arrived on Thursday afternoon, when Ariana Grande confirmed reports that she had pulled out after clashing with producers — apparently Ehrlich himself — over which song to perform.“I’ve kept my mouth shut but now you’re lying about me,” Grande wrote on Twitter, responding to an Associated Press interview in which Erhlich said that she “felt it was too late for her to pull something together.”ImageAlicia Keys will host the 61st annual Grammy Awards on Sunday.CreditAngela Weiss/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images“I can pull together a performance over night and you know that, Ken,” she wrote. “It was when my creativity & self expression was stifled by you, that i decided not to attend. I hope the show is exactly what you want it to be and more.”Last year was another flash point in the troubled history of the Grammys and hip-hop, as Jay-Z, the most nominated artist, with eight nods — including album, record and song of the year — went home empty-handed, and Lamar, while winning all five awards in the rap field, lost out on album of the year, to Bruno Mars. Three months later, Lamar won the Pulitzer Prize for music.“For the Pulitzers to get it right and the Grammys to get it wrong says a lot,” said Troy Carter, an artist manager and former Spotify executive.Portnow said he believed the Grammys had made good-faith efforts to reach out to artists, but the tensions have shown no signs of letting up.“We would hope that all nominees attend the show and be there as their own achievements are celebrated,” Portnow said, “because that’s really what it’s about.”But while race has been a growing problem for years, the Grammys’ most urgent issue is over gender. Last year, a report by the University of Southern California, released days before the show, found dismal numbers about the representation of women in the music industry and at the Grammys. Lorde, the only woman nominated for album of the year in 2018, was not offered a solo performance slot.After the show, Portnow’s “step up” comment drew an immediate outcry, with some women music executives calling for his resignation. (Portnow said at the time that his words had been taken out of context, and later announced that would leave his position at the expiration of his contract in July.)In response, the Recording Academy appointed a task force, led by Tina Tchen, a former chief of staff to Michelle Obama, to “identify the various barriers and unconscious biases faced by underrepresented communities” at the academy and in the wider industry.Working with the task force, the academy has tried to make its voting pool more diverse, inviting 900 new people, from a variety of backgrounds, to be members; of those, 22 percent accepted in time to vote this year, according to Laura Segura Mueller, the academy’s vice president of membership and industry relations. Last week the task force challenged the music industry to hire more women producers and engineers, two jobs that are overwhelmingly male.Even with these steps, this year’s nominations show just how much work is left to achieve real gender parity. On the eight songs up for record of the year, a total of 48 producers and engineers were credited, and only two were female.One of them is Lady Gaga, as a producer of “Shallow,” her song with Bradley Cooper from “A Star Is Born,” which is a strong contender for both record and song of the year. Lady Gaga is scheduled to perform, but that night Cooper will be at the Baftas, the British film awards. (Taylor Swift, who is up for just one award, pop vocal album, is also in London, filming an adaptation of “Cats,” and is not expected to attend the show.)And this week U.S.C. released an updated version of its report, showing that the numbers for women working in music have not improved. Looking at Billboard’s year-end Hot 100 list for the last seven years — a total of 633 songs, after removing duplicates — the report found that of 1,455 artists credited on those songs, only 17.1 percent were women. In another finding, only three of those 633 songs were credited solely to female songwriters.“This report really solidifies what we saw last year,” said Stacy L. Smith, the founder of U.S.C.’s Annenberg Inclusion Initiative, and the leader of the study, “and confirms that females are still facing an inclusion crisis in prominent positions in the music space.”Portnow said he viewed last year’s criticism as an opportunity to address important issues, and for the academy to take a leadership role in the industry. Not everyone will be happy, he said, but that’s O.K.“The underlying factors of what makes people happy or unhappy changes from year to year,” he said. “It might be something musical, or it might be something sociological, which is what we’re seeing more of in today’s climate. But that’s appropriate, because that’s the time in history we are living in.”Joe Coscarelli contributed reporting. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Can the Grammys Please All? Oh, Please. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageOpinionGreg MilnerThey Really Don’t Make Music Like They Used ToFeb. 7, 2019ImageMusic Lives in the Present. Can the Grammys Escape the Past?Feb. 6, 2019ImageFor Innovation at the Grammys, Look at the Best Music Video CategoryJan. 30, 2019ImageShow AllAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsExcerpts From Trump’s Interview With The New York Times - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Excerpts From Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesAdvertisementSupported byExcerpts From Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesVideoIn edited audio excerpts from an interview with New York Times reporters, President Trump discussed Jeff Sessions, Donald Trump Jr., Robert S. Mueller III and the newly disclosed conversation he had with Vladimir V. Putin.CreditCreditStephen Crowley/The New York TimesBy The New York TimesFeb. 1, 2019President Trump spoke with The New York Times on Thursday, sitting in the Oval Office for an interview with two White House correspondents, Peter Baker and Maggie Haberman, and A. G. Sulzberger, the newspaper’s publisher.[For more coverage and analysis of the discussion, read here.]The following are excerpts from that conversation, transcribed by The Times. They have been lightly edited for content and clarity, and omit off-the-record comments and asides._____________________________________PRESIDENT TRUMP: How you guys doing? You’re O.K.?PETER BAKER, chief White House correspondent: We’re good. How are you?TRUMP: Very good. We had a busy day.A.G. SULZBERGER, publisher of The New York Times: I can imagine.TRUMP: So, we just had, this is from, they just delivered that to me from President Xi. You’ll get a transcript of the meeting. The press was here. A lot of the press was here. A nice letter. They have a nice way of giving letters.But we’re doing very successfully.______________BAKER: So you had the meeting today with the vice premier.TRUMP: Yeah.BAKER: Do you feel like you got a deal, or close to a deal?TRUMP: Well, we’re getting closer. It’s a big deal. It’s a big deal. And we’re going comprehensive. We’re not just — He announced that he was buying — today — a tremendous amount of soybeans and various farm products. And I think you’ll be given that information in a little while, too. But he announced. What he did was the vice premier came in. He was here for two days having meetings. He’s leaving tomorrow. They’re meeting again now. And negotiations are going very well.______________TRUMP: That doesn’t mean there are any guarantees. But I will say there’s a very good feeling. There’s a very good relationship. This is the letter. You can actually read it. This is the translated version. So you can get a print out of that. But that was given out, and it was also, I guess it was read. They had the interpreter read it.BAKER: And do you feel like they’re going to get a deal by March 1st? Would it take longer, do you think?TRUMP: It’s possible. It’s a very short period of time for a deal this big. But it’s very possible. But many of the points were agreed to. And some haven’t been. I believe that a lot of the biggest points are going to be agreed to by me and him. In other words, they’re just not going to be authorized to agree to certain things that you folks write about and read about — intellectual property and lots of other things. And I think that will be agreed to by me and him at the right time. Like when you make a big deal, or a big scoop, you have to approve that little thing. And I think they’re probably waiting, they’re waiting for me and him to sit down and agree on five points at the end, or 10 points at the end.BAKER: What would that be?TRUMP: Well, I think control is very important. I think the checking to make sure that — we’re putting in a very strong system of checks and balances so that when we make a deal we know that it’s happening. In other words, that it’s being followed. And we’ve asked for the most stringent controls on that, because there’s been difficulty over the years with certain places. And that’s a very important element that’s been agreed to. But you have to get it down in writing.You’re going to have intellectual property. You’re going to have theft, because so many things have been, in theory, done a little bit differently. And I think that in the end we’re going to have something that’s going to be very special, if it happens.I could have had a deal done, if I wanted to make — you know, most people thought it was going to be a deal where they buy a tremendous amount of corn and soybeans and that’ll be it and everybody’s happy and the farmers are happy. But he actually announced today — I wish you were here, because it was sort of a great thing to watch. The press was packed. A lot of Chinese press, too. And he announced that he’s buying a massive amount of soybeans and various other farm products today. Starting immediately. And that’s going to make a lot of farmers very happy. So you know, that was very nice.BAKER: Do you think it’s possible that you might still go, even if you reach a deal on all of the points you’re trying to reach, leave some of the tariffs on? Is that a possibility?TRUMP: Yes.BAKER: Indefinitely left on?TRUMP: Peter, without the tariffs, we wouldn’t be talking. And I make this point clear to them. We’ve never had a deal with China. We’ve never had a trade deal with China. You have the World Trade Organization, which is a disaster for the United States. The World Trade Organization is probably the worst trade deal ever made with Nafta being second. The World Trade Organization helped create China. If you look at China, it’s flatlined. And from the day the World Trade Organization came into existence, it’s a rocket ship. But just the opposite for the United States. That was a terrible deal for the United States and it was an unbelievably good deal for China.BAKER: So some tariffs could remain permanent even with a good deal?TRUMP: Yeah, sure. We have 25 percent now on $50 billion. And by the way, Peter, that’s a lot of money pouring into our Treasury, you know. We never made 5 cents with China. We’re getting right now 25 percent on $50 billion. And then I was putting 25 percent at a later date, which date came and went — 25 percent or $200 billion.______________MAGGIE HABERMAN, White House correspondent: You’ve talked about the sacrifice that this has presented for yourself, for your family, being president. For your business. Could you ever see a point in the next year where you say, “You know what, I don’t need to do this again, I don’t need to run for re-election”?TRUMP: I don’t see it, because — so I just gave you a list of a lot of the things we’ve done. And this list isn’t even complete. I don’t even know if you have it.HABERMAN: No, I have it. I’ve got it.TRUMP: Just grab it. Reading material for the night. I’ve actually had, because they’ve done things that are artificial. So there’s been more of a burden on me than other presidents.HABERMAN: Past presidents have done things that were artificial?TRUMP: Past presidents, yeah. I think for the most part, yeah, past presidents. I really believe, when I say that we’ve accomplished — when you look at that list, whether it’s the biggest regulation cuts in history, that’s one of the reasons the economy is doing well. Before the taxes, actually. But the tax cuts, but so many other things when you look at that and you go down the list: Veterans Choice, V.A. Choice. They’ve been trying — as long as you’ve been writing they’ve been trying to get V.A. Choice. And now I’m going to do Phase 2 on V.A. Choice, which is, you know, the next step. But the first step was just a massive step. Nobody thought it could be done.HABERMAN: What’s left? What do you have that you would want to — why — what’s the goal for the next term?TRUMP: I think what we’ll be focusing on will be national security, very much. So we’ve very largely — we’re in the process of rebuilding the military. Which was truly depleted.______________HABERMAN: So, there is no scenario in which you’d say, “I’ve done what I can,” right?TRUMP: No, because it’s a very big job and there is a lot to do. And I would say that I would really start focusing — you know, we’ve done a lot on health care, and people haven’t given us too much credit. We have a lot of the different plans, the cooperative plans and other plans. Health care was terminated, and if the Obamacare were repealed and replaced — except for John McCain, it would have been, you know, he campaigned against it for six years, and then when he had the chance, he went thumbs down at 2:00 in the morning.Um, but, I believe it’s going to be terminated, whether it be through the Texas case, which is going through the court system as a victory right now, because of, you know, the various elements of that case, you would think it would have to be terminated. But a deal will be made for good health care in this country. That’s one of the things I’ll be doing.National security is very important and we’re fighting over — a very important element is the southern border. When we talk about drugs coming from China, the fentanyl — you look at the heroin and a lot of the other drugs, they come from — 90 percent, more than 90 percent — from right across the southern border. And unlike what the Democrats say, they don’t, you don’t bring trucks of drugs through the checkpoints. You bring trucks of drugs by making a right 20 miles, and a left into the country. They’re not bringing, you know, they bring massive amounts of drugs, and they do it because there’s no barrier, there’s no hardened wall that you can’t knock down with your breath.So, Maggie, here’s the bottom line: I love doing it. I don’t know if i should love doing it, but I love doing it.We just had a deal —and I was so looking forward to introducing you because it was very impressive. You know the whole — this room was totally, it was a sea of seats, we had the entire cabinet. They are very impressive people, and I had it all teed up and I said, “Where are they?” Right? I said, “Where the hell are they?”HABERMAN: We were in the security tent, sorry.TRUMP: Anyway.HABERMAN: [Inaudible]TRUMP: What I’m saying, there’s a lot, there’s always a lot to do, no matter how much you do. I’ve done a lot, and there’s a lot to do.BAKER: Do you think you’ll have a Republican challenger for the nomination? Is that something you —TRUMP: I don’t see it. You know, we’ve had polls as high as 93 percent. Which is the highest there is. Reagan was 86.HABERMAN: W. was the only other one, right? George W. Bush?TRUMP: Um —HABERMAN: They seemed higher —TRUMP: During, during a tiny little period, during the World Trade Center. That ended quickly.HABERMAN: Do you look at Larry Hogan? Or Bill Weld, has that crossed your mind —TRUMP: No. No. I have great support in the party. We have great support. I guess anything is possible. But look, we have among the highest polls — and actually the highest polls — but among the highest polls ever in the history of the Republican party.Democrats, I mean the Democrats, I’m watching what’s going on. They’ve really drifted far left. They may even be too left for you folks, you know. I’m not even sure. But they’ve gone pretty far out there. And, uh —BAKER: Who do you think is their toughest candidate?TRUMP: So, you never know that answer. You — somebody that you think would be the least tough is the toughest. I would say, the best opening so far would be Kamala [pronouncing as Kameela] Harris. I would say, in terms of the opening act, I would say, would be her. I think she probably —HABERMAN: What stood out to you about it?TRUMP: I just think she seemed to have a little better opening act than others. I think.BAKER: Incredible crowd.TRUMP: A better crowd — better crowd, better enthusiasm. Some of the others were very flat. I do think Elizabeth Warren’s been hurt very badly with the Pocahontas trap. I think she’s been hurt badly. I may be wrong, but I think that was a big part of her credibility and now all of a sudden, it’s gone. And I may be wrong about that but, you know, I don’t see it. Some — you know, a lot of the folks have not decided to run yet. They might not run.HABERMAN: Joe Biden?TRUMP: I don’t — you know, I’d like to see him run. I’d like to see him run.Because you pit him, and — you take what happened to Obama. When you look at my numbers, and you look how we’ve done for the economy, we had a news conference before, where we had a lot of workers behind us, manufacturers and workers from manufacturing plants, and it was really impressive to see what they’ve done. And they said, “Two years ago, we were dead,” and now they’re thriving.You know, we’ve created over 500,000 manufacturing jobs, and the previous administration lost 200,000 over eight years and said that was the magic wand. I believe, I believe, Peter, right? The magic wand to get manufacturing back. I mean, manufacturing jobs are great jobs. Those are high paying, great jobs, and they make things. It’s a very important thing.So, I just think, I think when we have the lowest black unemployment ever —lowest Hispanic, you saw the Hispanic numbers. We were at, what, 19 points up? Where we have the lowest Asian [unemployment]. Where the women are the best in 52 years now. Where the unemployment numbers are the best in 51 years. Um, you know. That’s a good record.HABERMAN: Can I switch gears for a second? There’s been a story in the news the last two weeks about your son-in-law’s security clearance.TRUMP: Yeah.HABERMAN: Did you tell General Kelly or anyone else in the White House to overrule security officials? The career veterans —TRUMP: No. I don’t think I have the authority to do that. I’m not sure I do.Haberman: You do have the authority to do it.Trump: But I wouldn’t. I wouldn’t do it.HABERMAN: O.K.TRUMP: Um, Jared is a good —HABERMAN: You never —TRUMP: I was never involved with the security. I know that he — you know, just from reading — I know that there was issues back and forth about security for numerous people, actually. But I don’t want to get involved in that stuff.HABERMAN: O.K. Why would you want to — why stay out? You do have the authority to —TRUMP: I don’t know. I just don’t — I just, I never thought it was necessary. I also know him. He’s a very solid person, and I just can’t imagine he would have — I guess even, Ivanka, they, they, I heard that, uh, something with Jared and Ivanka —HABERMAN: Mhm.TRUMP: But, uh, I don’t believe I’ve ever met any of the national security — of the people that would do clearances. Um, and there’d be nothing wrong, I don’t think, with me calling them up to the Oval Office and say, “Hey give these people, you know, clearances” —HABERMAN: You just told me — [inaudible]TRUMP: Yeah, yeah, so there, I, I mean, I take back the other — I didn’t, I was answering a little bit different question. Uh, I have the right to do it, but I never thought it was necessary, Maggie. I never thought it was necessary.HABERMAN: And you didn’t direct General Kelly or anyone like that to do it?TRUMP: No. And, and frankly, I never thought it was necessary to do so.______________TRUMP: So I’ll tell you a story that just happened. So it just happened. [To an aide] Will you get that thing we just sent out? Will you do that? I had a meeting — and bring the picture in, bring the picture — so I had a meeting with Gina [Haspel] who’s very good and [Dan] Coats. And I was shocked and I was surprised because I saw it on television and I said, “Iran is a bad actor because if you read what they said.”HABERMAN: You mean you saw her testimony?TRUMP: Yeah. I said, “Iran is a bad actor.” And I could tell you stories of things that we were going to do to them as recently as a week ago. I said, “Iran is a very bad actor. What’s this like Iran is kindergarten stuff?” They said, “Sir, we never said it.” I said, “What are you talking about?”Then I said, “And ISIS — we almost have the caliphate 100 percent. What are you talking about?” Like ISIS has got — and I mean, I’m not, by the way — the defeat is an interesting word. Because you can say you have the caliphate, but you’re always going to have people that escape the caliphate and you’ll have people around. There’s nothing — but that doesn’t mean you’re going to keep your armies there and everything. Because you’re always going to have that. Somebody is going to walk into a store unfortunately.But I said, “What is that all about? Second of all, third of all, you know how well we’re doing with North Korea, what’s that?”They said, “Sir, our testimony was totally mischaracterized.” I said, “What are you talking about?” And when you read their testimony and you read their statements, it was mischaracterized by the media.HABERMAN: The media mischaracterized it?TRUMP: You know what I mean. Because when you read their statement, it’s not like it was portrayed in the media. Because I came in —HABERMAN: What did they think they were saying? What did they tell you that they were —TRUMP: When you see what they said, and they’re, they’re — let’s put it this way. It was really very different when I read it. Because I came in here saying what is this? You mean you’re — because one of the things they said very strongly, according to, was that Iran is, essentially, a wonderful place. And I said, “It’s not a wonderful place, it’s a bad place, and they’re doing bad things.”And they said, “We agree.” I said, “What do you mean you agree. You can’t agree —” And they said the testimony was totally mischaracterized.______________HABERMAN: So you’re happy with Dan Coats?TRUMP: I’m happy with Dan Coats. I am. That doesn’t mean —HABERMAN: Is that a change?TRUMP: Well, no, everybody changes. You know, this business, other than me, everybody changes. You know, if you look at my staff.So I wish you could have been here before. Because we had this whole side of the room with secretaries, every one of them. Sonny Perdue. Linda McMahon, big, a big sleeper, she’s phenomenal. Somebody said, she’s one of our best — you know and you don’t ever hear about her or anything. We had Mike Pompeo. We had all of our secretaries, many of our secretaries here, probably half of them.And then you had the China group over here, the delegation. And I’m looking and I’m saying these are really outstanding people. They’re outstanding. Did you notice that today? How outstanding? We have a lot of great people.Now I do tell the story about driving down Pennsylvania Avenue, you know. Because I’d been in Washington probably 17 times in my life. And on the 18th time, I was president of the United States. And you know, Washington wasn’t really my place. And I didn’t know people. I didn’t know a lot of people. And I got — I put some people in that I wasn’t happy with and I put some people in that I was very happy with.But we’ve gotten it very — you know, as I’ve — now I know a lot of people.HABERMAN: Do you ever — and I want to go back to your point about military intervention in a second — but do you have any thoughts about defense secretary and where that’s getting in terms of —TRUMP: So I wasn’t happy with Mattis. I told Mattis to give me a letter. He didn’t just give me that letter. I told him. And you could have seen that on “60 Minutes.” I did “60 Minutes” and Lesley Stahl asked me a question: “What do you think of General Mattis?”HABERMAN: You called him a Democrat, didn’t you?TRUMP: And I said let me be generous. But I just — I didn’t like the job he was doing. I wasn’t happy with it. I wasn’t happy with the — I got him more money than the military has ever seen before. And I wasn’t happy with the job that he was doing at all. And I said it’s time.That’s why in the letter he wrote, “You have to have your own choice.” The reason he said that was because I said, “You’re just not my choice.”HABERMAN: Who is your choice then, sir?TRUMP: Well, I have a lot of great people that want it. I also have somebody there who’s really been very good. Pat, Pat Shanahan. He’s acting. And he’s been doing — Maggie, he’s been doing a great job. Yeaaaaah?AIDE: You just have some important calls whenever you’re finished.TRUMP: O.K., I’ll be in in a little while. What’s more important than The New York Times? Ok, nothing, nothing.HABERMAN: We ask that of ourselves all the time.TRUMP: So I’m sure you hear good things about him. He’s a very solid guy. You know it’s interesting, historically, you just never — you rarely put a military person in, which surprises me. When I first got here, I said what do you mean? That’s the natural of all naturals. Actually you need special approvals to put them in, you know, etc., etc. Normally a business person goes in and I mean you have one exception or two exceptions, but historically a business person goes in to the secretary of defense.BAKER: He might stay in?TRUMP: Pat — he could stay. Pat Shanahan is doing a terrific job. A tremendous number of people would like that position. One thing — first of all, there’s really no chaos in the White House, ’cause the chaos thing — you see it, you’re here, you see what’s going on.HABERMAN: Why do people keep writing books saying that’s the way things are?TRUMP: Because that’s the way they sell.HABERMAN: So they’re just making up all this? What about Cliff Sims?TRUMP: Well, I had this aide. I didn’t even know who it was. I said who is Cliff Sims? Who is he? And he would take me to — you know I’d do like a little address — he’d come to — he’d say we’re ready for the president. And he’d walk me down to wherever room we’re doing a weekly recording or a monthly recording. I hardly knew the guy.Now I — once they — I said show me what he looks like. And they showed me a picture. I said, oh, yeah, I know him. He’s the video guy. This guy, now he made it sound like he’s a top aide. What happens — and I’ve also had some very good books — but what — and I made a mistake.The mistake I made is on a couple of books, I never spoke to the people. When you don’t speak to the people, it’s impossible to get—HABERMAN: [Bob] Woodward?TRUMP: Woodward was a mistake. And that was a mistake where they — where I believe he did, he notified a number of people. “I really want to speak to” — I would have spoken to him in two seconds. But I didn’t speak to him and that was a mistake not speaking to him.And it was a mistake of my staff. [Turning to the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders] You understand that? It was a mistake of my staff.SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS: To this day, I’ve never had a conversation with him.TRUMP: If I would have spoken to him, even if it was for a fairly short period of time, I think it would have been a little different. The other guy was a huckster, who did the book that did very well.HABERMAN: Michael Wolff?TRUMP: “Fire and Fury.” It took my name — my name from my Korean situation — “Fire and fury like the world has never seen.”HABERMAN: I recall.TRUMP: And again, I didn’t speak to him. And I would have. I definitely — I never saw him. I did an article with him a couple of years before. And I met him at a house that I have in Beverly Hills. We did an interview. It was a decent story to be honest. It was, you know, a pretty nice story. But I should have seen him too as he was in the White House a lot — that was a [Stephen] Bannon deal. And yet Bannon, now, if you’ve seen him on an interview over the last six months, I think there’s nobody that speaks better. It’s a crazy situation.BAKER: Do you talk to him?TRUMP: I have not. No, I haven’t spoken to him in a year and a half.HABERMAN: The last time you talked to him was when you fired him?TRUMP: Have I what?HABERMAN: When he was fired, it was the last time you spoke to him? Or soon after?TRUMP: I would say in that territory, yeah. I’m not sure that I spoke to him at all during. You know, maybe a phone call. But not, no, I don’t think so.HABERMAN: Speaking of former aides, we wanted to talk to you about [Roger] Stone.TRUMP: Sure, now you know Roger didn’t work for me in the campaign.HABERMAN: Initially and then he —TRUMP: Well, yeah, but that was before I — you know, that was either early primary or before primary.HABERMAN: It was August or September [2015].TRUMP: That was a long time. I will say this, I’ve always liked — I like Roger, he’s a character. But I like Roger. For a team of 29 people with AK27s, or whatever they were using, to charge a house like they did at 6:00 in the morning. I think that was a very sad thing for this country.ImageListen to ‘The Daily’: The President and the PublisherDuring an interview in the Oval Office, the publisher of The New York Times questioned President Trump about his attacks on the press.transcriptBack to The Dailybars0:00/32:40-32:40transcriptListen to ‘The Daily’: The President and the PublisherHosted by Michael Barbaro, produced by Theo Balcomb and Rachel Quester, and edited by Lisa TobinDuring an interview in the Oval Office, the publisher of The New York Times questioned President Trump about his attacks on the press.michael barbaroFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today: On Thursday in the Oval Office, the president of the United States debated the publisher of The New York Times about the role of a free press. It’s Friday, February 1. Oh, for the purposes of this interview, how would you like me to refer to you, like, in terms of your actual name? Do you want to be A. G.? Do you want to be Arthur?a g sulzbergerA. G., yeah.michael barbaroO.K. Good. A. G., tell me the story of what happened this past summer.a g sulzbergerWell, I had recently been named publisher of The Times. And I was coming back from dinner one day, and I got a email from Sarah Sanders — not someone who had emailed me before — and she asked if I could come to the White House later that week for a private, off-the-record meeting with the president. Our journalists are typically extremely cautious about giving off-the-record meetings to prominent newsmakers. But it’s part of the responsibility that comes with being publisher to be willing to sit down across from folks who are regularly receiving coverage, particularly regularly receiving tough coverage, and hear if they have any concerns. So I felt that I should accept. Meeting face to face with the president, I felt it was really important to raise some of my concerns about his increasingly strong anti-press rhetoric. I also felt pretty strongly that I should bring a journalist along as well. So I brought James Bennet, my colleague who oversees the Opinion department, including the editorial page, and we headed down to Washington.michael barbaroAnd what happened?a g sulzbergerJames asked most of the questions as the journalist in the room. And then at some point, I sensed a natural break in the conversation, and I brought up what I had been wanting to share with him. I said to the president, I’m increasingly alarmed by your anti-press rhetoric. You know, phrases like “fake news” I find very troubling. But I’m deeply concerned about the implication of phrases like “enemy of the people.” And I believe that this language is not just divisive, it’s dangerous.michael barbaroAnd this is all off-the-record, so this is just a message that you very much wanted to deliver to the president directly.a g sulzbergerThat’s right. And it was a civil meeting. He did hear me out. And at the end of the conversation, after we had stood up and were preparing to leave, he thanked us again for coming in, turned to me, pointed to his head and said, you’ve given me a lot to think about. And I really will think about it.michael barbaroSo you leave the White House, and what happens?a g sulzbergerSo largely nothing. I go back to work. He goes back to work. And about a week, maybe 10 days later, I’m at home. It was Sunday morning. I think I was either changing a diaper or had just finished changing a diaper. And I get a call that informs me that the president has just tweeted about our meeting.archived recordingSome breaking news now as The New York Times goes to Washington. President Trump tweeted just a little while ago that he met with A. G. Sulzberger, the relatively new publisher of The New York Times, at the White House recently. Tweeting this today. Quote, “Had a very good and interesting meeting at the White House with A. G. Sulzberger, publisher of The New York Times.” President Trump continuing, quote, “Spent much time talking about the vast amounts of fake news being put out by the media and how that fake news has morphed into the phrase ‘enemy of the people.’ Sad.”michael barbaroAnd is that your understanding of what happened in the room?a g sulzbergerNo. It was a gross mischaracterization of our conversation. I mean, certainly we had had a meeting at the White House. I’ll leave it to him to decide whether it was good and interesting. And we talked about his use of phrases like “fake news” and “enemy of the people.” But it was not a conversation in which I was agreeing with those characterizations in the least.michael barbaroSo what exactly did you do?a g sulzbergerSo I grabbed my laptop and typed out a very brief account of what had actually transpired in the meeting. We issue our statement, which I thought spoke for itself, and the news cycle moved on to other things, and I moved on to other things. And then six months later, this week, I get another email from Sarah Huckabee Sanders, this time asking me to join the president for a private dinner at the White House.michael barbaroHuh. And what are you thinking when you get that invitation?a g sulzbergerI’m thinking that I can’t possibly accept this invitation.michael barbaroWhy not?a g sulzbergerBecause I’m already reluctant about allowing people to go off the record. But the notion that I would do that with someone who had so clearly violated the terms that he had requested, and that I had agreed to, a second time just felt like a non-starter to me.michael barbaroSo you’re prepared, it sounds, to say no and to walk away from this opportunity.a g sulzbergerI did say no. I wrote an email back, which I thought was perfectly polite but also very direct, saying that given what had transpired the last time we had such a meeting, that I’d be unable to accept a private dinner with the president. But I also added — and I thought it was probably a long shot — that if the president was willing to meet on the record with several of our journalists for an interview, that I’d be happy to join.michael barbaroAnd what was the response?a g sulzbergerTo my surprise, the next day they said yes. So this morning, Maggie Haberman and I took the train down to D.C., where we met our colleague, Peter Baker, and prepared for the first significant on-the-record interview we’ve done with the president in over a year.michael barbaroAnd how are you thinking about this interview, because you’re the publisher of The Times. You’re not a reporter. But you are going to the White House with two of the Times’s star White House reporters. What exactly is this meeting, in your mind?a g sulzbergerWell, that’s exactly right. My role in that room is very different than Maggie and Peter’s. So you know, when we sat down to plan it out, I made very clear that I would leave the reporting part of the meeting entirely to them. But I also said that there were a few things that I wanted to convey to the president following up on our previous meeting.michael barbaroEssentially some unfinished business.a g sulzbergerThat’s right. The White House is just a few blocks from the bureau, so maybe 20 minutes before the meeting, we headed out into the cold and walked over. Got to the White House security. Maggie breezed through, Peter breezed through, and then it turns out that I had not been entered into the system. So I found myself standing outside in the cold for quite some time while they decided what to do with me.michael barbaroAnd what did they decide to do with you?a g sulzbergerEventually some embarrassed member of the communications team came over and apologized for forgetting to enter me into the system. And I guess I passed whatever test of trustworthiness, and they gave me a pass and went through security. So we get in. We’re escorted into the Oval Office and take some seats in front of the president’s desk. He walks in the room.maggie habermanMr. President, good to see you.a g sulzbergerShakes each of our hands.president trumpSit down, please.peter bakerThank you.a g sulzbergerVery friendly. And we begin the conversation.president trumpWe just had a great meeting with the vice premier of China.a g sulzbergerPretty early in the conversation, he talks about how, just moments earlier, there was a group of Chinese leaders there, along with most of his cabinet, for trade negotiations.president trumpAnd we had it set so you could walk in. But were you delayed at the gate or something?maggie habermanThere was an incident. [LAUGHS]president trumpOh, what happened?a g sulzbergerOh, everything’s fine. That he had been very much hoping that we would see the impressive scene and wondered why we were late.maggie habermanWe’re fine. Everything’s fine.a g sulzbergerI think I looked like a suspect individual.president trumpYou look good.maggie habermanThey weren’t sure they wanted to let A. G. in.president trumpYou look good.a g sulzbergerAt which point Sarah Huckabee Sanders had to let him know that I had been blocked at the gate.michael barbaroYou were the reason why.a g sulzbergerI was the reason why.peter bakerSo having had the meeting today with the vice premier, do you feel like you got a deal, or close to a deal?president trumpWell, we’re getting closer.a g sulzbergerSo after some small talk, the interview begins. Maggie and Peter start going through their long list of questions.maggie habermanYou’ve talked about the sacrifice that this has presented for yourself, for your family, being president, for your business. Could you ever see a point in the next year where you say, you know what, I don’t need to do this again? I don’t need to run for re-election?president trumpI don’t see it because — so I just gave you a list of a lot of the things we’ve done. And this list isn’t even complete. I don’t know if you have it. Yeah. That’s not even — just grab it. Reading material for tonight.a g sulzbergerMaggie asks him whether he’s intent on running for another term.president trumpMaggie, here’s the bottom line. I love doing it. I don’t know if I should love doing it. But I love doing it.a g sulzbergerHe talks about his recent phone call with the head of the Venezuelan opposition.president trumpWe had a very good talk. Just more than anything else, I guess, I wished him good luck.a g sulzbergerHe talks about Nancy Pelosi.maggie habermanThis is your first experience dealing with Nancy Pelosi having the gavel as the speaker. Do you feel that you properly estimated her strengths? Do you feel like you underestimated them?president trumpI’ve actually always gotten along with her, but now I don’t think I will anymore. I think that she’s hurting the country very badly.a g sulzbergerAnd says that he’s given up on their relationship.president trumpIf she doesn’t approve a wall, the rest of it’s just a waste of money and time and energy.a g sulzbergerHe talks about the shutdown.president trumpBut based on what I hear and based on what I read, they don’t want to give money for the wall. You know I’m building the wall. You know that. I’m building the wall right now.a g sulzbergerYou know, for the beginning of the interview, he seems excited and engaged, almost gregarious. He’s talking in superlatives and with obvious excitement about the work and what he describes as his accomplishments.president trumpAnd one of the generals said, you’ve done more to defeat ISIS than any other person, not even close.a g sulzbergerAnd then, as the questions shift towards Russia —maggie habermanHas Rod Rosenstein given you any sense over the course of the last year about whether you have any exposure, either in — or there’s any concerns, or whether you’re a target of either Mueller or —president trumpWell, he told — he told the attorneys that I’m not a subject — I’m not a target. Yeah, oh yeah.a g sulzbergerAnd to the Cohen investigation.peter bakerCan I ask you, sir, can you clarify the Trump Tower Moscow proposal, right? There was this discussion. And we’ve learned since the campaign that this went on longer through the campaign than we had expected.president trumpSo let me tell you about Trump Tower Moscow. This was a very unimportant deal. This was a very unimportant deal.a g sulzbergerHe becomes visibly more cautious. His arms creep up and they’re now folded on his chest.peter bakerYou told people that you didn’t have any business there. And people might have misunderstood —president trumpWell, that wasn’t business.peter baker[INAUDIBLE] Misleading to say —president trumpPeter, that wasn’t business there. That was a —peter bakerWell, you’re pursuing the business, right?president trumpThat was essentially — I had no money invested.a g sulzbergerHis sentences are growing shorter.maggie habermanDid you ever talk to him about WikiLeaks? Because that seemed to be what Mueller was — you never had a conversation with him about that.president trumpNo, I didn’t.maggie habermanAnd did you ever tell him to — or other people to get in touch with him?president trumpNever did.a g sulzbergerAnd it’s clear he’s being cautious. At one point, he was visibly uncomfortable enough that Sarah Sanders sort of muttered under her breath, next topic.president trumpThis job is, from an economic — you know, I get a kick out of these people saying, oh, a rich Arab stayed at his hotel.a g sulzbergerAnd then, as we’ve seen in previous interviews with President Trump, there are a lot of interesting tangents that he’ll take.president trumpI lost massive amounts of money doing this job. This is not for money.a g sulzbergerOne of the more striking was him talking about how everyone assumes he’s making so much money and benefiting so much from being president, but that actually —president trumpThis is one of the great losers of all time. You know, fortunately I don’t need money.a g sulzbergerAssuming the office had come at a significant financial cost. And I think he used some language like, it’s the biggest loser.michael barbaroBeing president.a g sulzbergerThat’s right.president trumpBut I lose — I mean, the numbers are incredible.a g sulzbergerSo initially we had been told that the conversation would be around half an hour. And —maggie habermanMaggie, he’s been doing a great job. Yeah?speakerJust have some important calls whenever you’re finished.president trumpO.K. I’ll be in in a little while.a g sulzbergerLike clockwork, at about half an hour, his assistant came into the room and told him that time was up and he had a busy schedule.president trumpWhat’s more important than The New York Times, O.K.? Nothing.a g sulzbergerThe conversation continued like that for fully another half hour. So a full hour.speakerMr. President, we’re coming up on 45 minutes.president trumpYeah, that’s O.K.a g sulzbergerOn multiple occasions, Sarah Huckabee Sanders and Bill Shine tried to interject by saying, O.K., let’s do one or two more questions.maggie habermanMr. President, can I ask you a question that I was wondering as you were all talking about this?speakerAnd then maybe — [INAUDIBLE] Make this the last one.maggie habermanCan I ask you five more questions? [LAUGHTER]a g sulzbergerBut Maggie and Peter just kept right at it. And President Trump seemed happy and interested to continue to answer their questions.michael barbaroAnd what are you doing while Peter and Maggie are pressing the president on all these various questions?a g sulzbergerI didn’t say a word. I thought my role there was to open the doors for the two of them for an on-the-record interview.michael barbaroSo you stayed silent the entire time.a g sulzbergerThat’s right.president trumpThat doesn’t happen at The New York Times.a g sulzbergerMr. President, before we wind down, I didn’t want to miss the opportunity just to raise a concern that we discussed last time. But then I realized that the meeting was actually starting to wrap up. And it felt like the moment was right to share the concern that I wanted to raise with the president, which stemmed from our previous conversation. We discussed last time I was here.president trumpBy the way, you’re right. And I did not know, when we — did you apologize, I hope?sarah huckabee sandersYeah.president trumpBecause I did not know that. And I apologize for that. O.K.?a g sulzbergerThank you for saying that.president trumpI did not know that.a g sulzbergerAnd immediately he interjected and offered something of an apology. It took me a second to realize what it was about. But I believe he was apologizing for breaking the off-the-record agreement he had asked for in the previous meeting.michael barbaroAh, the tweet.a g sulzbergerBut I circled back and said — So the concern I raised then was about your anti-press rhetoric — fake news, enemy of the people. And at the time, I said I was concerned that it wasn’t just divisive, it was potentially dangerous, and warned that I thought it could have consequences. I feel like in the time since, we’ve started to see some of those consequences play out. We’ve seen around the world an unprecedented rise in attacks on journalists, threats to journalists, censorship. And as I’m saying this, he is leaning in and asking questions. Jailing of journalists and murders of journalists.president trumpWhere in particular?a g sulzbergerGlobally on every continent. I’m happy to send you some of the literature. It’s very closely tracked. But one of the things that’s been really striking to me is, as I’ve talked to my colleagues around the globe, working in different countries — particularly working in countries where a free press is already a tenuous thing — they say that they are increasingly of the belief that your rhetoric is creating a climate in which dictators and tyrants are able to employ your words in suppressing the free press. And I wanted to —michael barbaroSo it sounds like you two are having a genuine back-and-forth about the concerns you have about the dangers facing journalists, and your belief that he, as president, is contributing to that.a g sulzbergerThat’s right. That’s right. And to his credit, he heard me out and he listened to it. I guess the concern I want to raise is the effects that the broad-based attacks on journalism and journalists continue to have seems to be growing. And it particularly seems to be growing abroad with folks who aren’t covering your administration. They’re trying to do hard, dangerous work of ferreting out the truth in societies where the leadership often tries to suppress it. And I’d urge you to reconsider these attacks.president trumpI understand that.a g sulzbergerBut if you choose not to, I want you to be aware of some of the consequences that I’m starting to see out there.president trumpWould you say more so now than over the last five years?a g sulzbergerYes.president trumpRight now? I mean —a g sulzbergerYes.president trumpBut more so now than even a year ago.a g sulzbergerYes. And I think —president trumpI’m not happy to hear that.a g sulzbergerThe murder of Khashoggi is just the highest-profile example. But we’re seeing —michael barbaroA. G., are you experiencing the president’s questions and reactions as authentic? Because suddenly it’s starting to sound like he’s saying the things that a publisher of The New York Times might want to hear.a g sulzbergerYeah, I think that’s right. The United States and the occupants of your office historically have been the greatest defenders of a free press and of free speech globally.president trumpAnd I think I am, too. I want to be. I want to be.a g sulzbergerLook, it is hard for me to be optimistic about breaking through to him given that I had raised this exact set of concerns six months earlier, and he had said he was listening, said he was troubled by what he had heard, said that he thought his rhetoric had probably gone too far, and said that he would think about toning it down, and then has continued, if not escalated, his attacks on the free press. So he made a good show of listening. He asked follow-up questions. He expressed concern about some of the things I said. But it wasn’t fully clear whether I was getting through to him. And I wanted to circle back to this, first, I guess, to ask you if you were aware of these broad consequences that we’re seeing.president trumpSo the person, honestly, that’s been most suggestive of that is you, more so than others. I do notice that people are declaring more and more fake news, where they go, fake news. I even see it in other countries. I don’t necessarily attribute that to me. I think I can attribute the term to me. I think I was the one that started using it, I would say. But I do see that. But —a g sulzbergerBut can I just respond to that?president trumpYes, please, go ahead.a g sulzbergerBecause the phrase “fake news,” you’re exactly right. It has been embraced globally. And several countries have actually banned fake news. But it was a technique to actually ban an independent media. And so it’s not about viral stuff on Facebook. It’s about countries using that term to actually ban independent scrutiny of their actions.president trumpRight. I’ve seen that.a g sulzbergerYeah.president trumpI don’t like that. I mean, I don’t like that. I don’t like — though I do think it’s very bad for a country when the news is not accurately portrayed. I really do.a g sulzbergerAnd after this conversation goes on for a few minutes, he takes it in an interesting direction, and perhaps a predictable direction.michael barbaroWhich is what?a g sulzbergerHe starts complaining about his own coverage and explaining he feels that he has been inaccurately portrayed.president trumpAnd I do believe I’m a victim of that, honestly. In all due respect, I know what a good writer these two people are. But Peter’s been very tough on us the last couple of months. I don’t know why, because I really think I’m doing a great job.a g sulzbergerAnd at one point, he mentions Peter specifically, and says his recent articles have been too tough. Can I just say something on Peter? I mean, Peter has covered four administrations, four presidential administrations, starting with Clinton.president trumpI know.a g sulzbergerBut one of the things that we’ve learned over a century and a half of covering the men who’ve occupied this office is that every occupant feels that the press is too tough at times. But tough coverage is part of occupying the most powerful seat on earth. That chair right there that you’re sitting in is the most powerful seat on earth. And it comes with it scrutiny and questions. You have my — speaking for The Times — my enduring commitment that we will treat you fairly and accurately. I actually noticed a oil painting of President Lincoln over his shoulder, and I said, we’ve been covering presidential administrations for 150 years. Starting, I think, with that guy.president trumpHe was a good one.a g sulzbergerYeah, he’s a good one.michael barbaroOne of the best.a g sulzbergerYeah.president trumpI understand that. And I do. I would say this. I don’t mind a bad story if it’s true. I really don’t. You know, we’re all, like, big people. We understand what’s happening. I’ve had bad stories, very bad stories, where I thought it was true. And I would never complain. But when you get really bad stories where it’s not true, then you sort of say, that’s unfair. And, you know, you have a tremendous power. You have the power of the pen, the power of the ink. You have a tremendous power.a g sulzbergerAnd so we continued to go back and forth. And the striking thing about the conversation now is if the first hour of the conversation felt very much like a traditional interview — questions being asked by Maggie and Peter, and questions being answered by President Trump — now the conversation had taken a real turn, and it felt like we were having a searching debate about the role of media.president trumpWhat you do is a very important thing. And I will tell you, I would love if I was just covered fairly. If I were covered fairly — like, this should be a fair story. I don’t know what the story is — this should be a fair story. I actually think your readers would respect it.a g sulzbergerThere were interruptions. There was back and forth. And if at first he was listening to my concern, he became increasingly animated in sharing his concerns.michael barbaroI mean, this is fascinating. I’m curious, were you surprised in the moment by how this conversation was playing out, that it was becoming a conversation? Was that what you expected, because it seems like you had just wanted to reiterate a final point from your previous interview on the way out the door.a g sulzbergerI certainly wasn’t expecting the full back-and-forth, his level of interest and engagement in the conversation. At one point, Maggie jumped in.president trumpLet me look in the mirror.maggie habermanBut what do you see the role of the free press as? What is it that you think that the press does?a g sulzbergerAnd he gave her, in some ways, the most cautious, literal response that I’ve heard from him in either of my meetings with him.president trumpIt describes, and should describe, accurately what’s going on in anywhere it’s covering, whether it’s a nation or a state or a game or whatever. And if it describes it accurately and fairly, it’s a very, very important and beautiful thing.michael barbaroAnd do you agree with that definition of a free press?a g sulzbergerWell, I think his definition is accurate, but it’s also narrow. I view the core responsibility of The Times not just as helping people understand the world, but in seeking the truth wherever it leads, holding power to account. Those parts of our job can be hard to be on the other side of, and I’m sympathetic to that. But those are essential parts of how we meet our responsibility to inform the public. But I was really struck. There was this moment — it was a very human moment, and it seemed like a very sincere moment — when he talked about being a Queens-born kid.president trumpBut I came from Jamaica, Queens, Jamaica Estates, and I became president of the United States. I’m sort of entitled to a great story from my — just one — from my newspaper. I mean, you know.a g sulzbergerAnd he just wanted his hometown paper to write one positive story about him.michael barbaroHe just wants The Times to say something nice about him.a g sulzbergerThat’s what he said.president trumpI’m sort of entitled to one good story in The New York Times. I started off, I ran against very smart people and a lot of them.a g sulzbergerAnd he said it a few times.president trumpI just sort of think I’m entitled to a great story from The New York Times. I mean, I’ve done something that nobody’s ever done.michael barbaroWell, listening to the president talking about the media, did you feel that any of his complaints about the media were legitimate and recognizable?a g sulzbergerI don’t buy his premise that he hasn’t had that positive story. The first story he got was “Trump Triumphs.” You know, that was literally the headline. But he’s a disruptive political figure who has had an incredibly divisive approach to governing, and the coverage has reflected that.michael barbaroSo what do you think that this conversation meant to President Trump, and why do you think it became a conversation in the first place?a g sulzbergerI don’t know if I have the answer to that. I mean, obviously, this is a man whose public posture is that journalists are the enemy of the people. And I’ll tell you, part of what troubles me so much about that phrase is what do you do with enemies? You fight them. You lock them up. You kill them in war. But that’s never been President Trump’s private posture with journalists. And I think what this conversation showed is this is actually a man with a lot of respect for The New York Times as an institution. And I think he wants to feel that respect back. But he wants to feel it in a certain kind of way, with celebration of his actions, with validation of his performance, that I’m not sure a serious news organization, an independent news organization, can give any president. And so we have this tension between a president who, in a room with three journalists, can have a really interesting, open conversation about the role of journalism and the role of his own rhetoric in putting journalists at risk. But in public, I’m not sure we can expect change. I hope it’ll change. I really do. But I’m skeptical.michael barbaroA. G., thank you very much. We appreciate it.a g sulzbergerThank you, Michael.HABERMAN: Did you ever talk to him about WikiLeaks? Because that seemed —TRUMP: No.HABERMAN: You never had conversations with him.TRUMP: No, I didn’t. I never did.HABERMAN: Did you ever tell him to — or other people to get in touch with them?TRUMP: Never did.HABERMAN: You saw that was in the indictment.TRUMP: Can I tell you? I didn’t see it. I know what was in the indictment if you read it, there was no collusion with Russia. But that’s in a lot of these things. And a lot of them are: They come in, they interview somebody and they get them for lying. I mean, you know.I’ll give you an example. So I never met Carter Page. I think to this day I never met Carter Page. I never met Carter Page. [George] Papadopoulos, I never met him, other than one time, where he sat at a table along with maybe 10 or 15 other people, because they wanted to set up a national security team. And I guess he has a certain expertise in national security. So he was at a table very briefly. I don’t believe I ever spoke to him. You know there were a lot of people. I was there for a very short period of time. Never met him.People have been treated very, very badly. This is a very bad thing.HABERMAN: Who else has been treated very badly, in your opinion?TRUMP: Well, I’d rather save it for later. We’ll do something on it at the right time, but I did think this. When Roger Stone, who all of us know, I mean everybody knows Roger.______________TRUMP: He was not my consultant. But if you read the papers you know it’s like — the media, it’s like — but I’ve always liked him. He’s a character, and I’ll tell you what people respect what he said. Bearing false witness, etc. But yeah, people do respect what he said.HABERMAN: What he said about what?TRUMP: Bear false witness. I will never testify against the president. He actually said at one time — you know he’s said it numerous times, but I heard him say it one time he’s done a great job, he’s a great president, and I will not, you know, lie in order to — people respect that so much. They respect that.BAKER: Sir, can we clarify the Trump Tower Moscow proposal, right? There was this discussion. And we’ve learned since the last, since the campaign, that this went on longer through the campaign than we had expected —TRUMP: So let me tell you about about Trump Tower Moscow. This was a very unimportant deal. This was a very unimportant deal. No. 1. No. 2, this was a deal, the only thing you heard is through Rudy [Giuliani]. Is that what you heard? Through Rudy?BAKER: More recently we heard through Rudy, he quotes you.TRUMP: Rudy was incorrect. No. 1, he was incorrect, and we’ve explained that, he was wrong. Rudy has been wrong. A little bit. But what has happened is this. I didn’t care. That deal was not important. It was essentially a letter of intent or an option. I’m not even sure that they had a site. And if you look at where that was sent to, that was a Michael Cohen thing. If you look, I always say, Why don’t you bring this up, to Jay Sekulow, good guy. I think it was sent to almost like a public address for Moscow. If you take a look at it. Take a good solid look. The original letter or something was sent. They didn’t even have anybody to send it to. But that deal is just like other deals. I was doing other deals. I was running for president, but I was also running a business.BAKER: How late do you remember having any conversations about it in 2016? What was the latest that you remember?TRUMP: I would say it was early to middle of the year. Now, I don’t know that Cohen didn’t go a little bit longer than that. I don’t think it would be much longer. But then he could have come back to me and said, “Listen, I put it together.” Because that stuff happens. You know, you think a deal — I was running for president, I was doing really well. The last thing I cared about was building a building.BAKER: But you told people that you didn’t have any business there. People might have misunderstood.TRUMP: That wasn’t business. Peter, that wasn’t business.BAKER: Isn’t that misleading to say you weren’t pursuing business there, right?[Crosstalk]TRUMP: I had no money invested. It was a letter of intent, or option. It was a free option. It was a nothing. And I wasn’t doing anything. I don’t consider that even business. And frankly, that wasn’t even on my radar. If you take a look at that, take a look at the deal. There was no money put up. There was no transfer. I don’t think they had a location. I’m not even sure if they had a location.BAKER: Clearly there was a hope of having money. That was the reason you were pursuing it, right?TRUMP: My point is this — It was a free option to look at a deal, to look at deals. That was not like, “I’m going to buy a property in Moscow. I’m going to do — or I’m building a building in Moscow.” Now, I would have had every right to do a deal. That’s what I did. That’s what I did.Rudy was wrong in that he went — I think what Rudy was looking at, I think, was that in the statement I made to the Mueller group, we talked about during that period of a year, up until the election, we talked about that. So he may have been referring to that.But the way I view it is early in the year to middle of the year, no interest. I had very little interest in the first place, and again, I viewed it as a free option. It may have been a letter of intent. I don’t know exactly what it was called. But it was unimportant. And you know what was very important to me? Running for president. And doing well. But I was running a business. I mean, I would have been allowed to build 20 buildings. I was doing other things. I was doing a lot of other things. I was running a business. Because as you would know, there weren’t a lot of people at the time that thought I was going to win. So I don’t want to give up a year and a half of my life, not do anything, run for president, then have to go back and say, you know, “I could have kept running my business.”Very interestingly, you know, George Washington ran his business. You can, I guess, you can go long beyond the election, if you wanted to. You know. But I didn’t do that.BAKER: But there’s a difference between running a domestic business and being possibly in business with Russian figures at the same time, right? You can imagine why people might find that concerning?TRUMP: I have nothing. All I did was be a good candidate. Russia didn’t help me. Russia did not help me. There was no collusion. There was none of that. I was a good candidate. I did a good job. I won’t say whether she was a good candidate or not. I mean, the primary collusion was Hillary Clinton. If you take a look, Peter. I mean, look at that phony dossier. Some of that money, they say, went to Russia. [Tony] Podesta was involved with Russia. You look at the kind of relationships they had. They had real relationships with Russia. I had a potential, a deal that frankly wasn’t even a deal. It was literally — I viewed it as an option. But maybe it was called a letter of intent. Something like that.BAKER: Has Attorney General [Matthew] Whitaker given you any indication of whether you face any exposure in this investigation?TRUMP: No.HABERMAN: Or your family?TRUMP: I don’t even talk to him about it.HABERMAN: You never talk to Matt Whitaker?TRUMP: I don’t talk to him about it. How can you have exposure when you haven’t done anything? I had nothing to do with any of this, other than that I was a good candidate that won an election.HABERMAN: Has Rod Rosenstein given you any sense over the course of the last year about whether you have any exposure, either in — or there’s any concerns, or whether you’re a target of the Mueller report?TRUMP: Well he told the attorneys that I’m not a subject, I’m not a target.HABERMAN: He told your attorneys?TRUMP: Yeah. Oh, yeah.HABERMAN: Did he say that about the S.D.N.Y. [Southern District of New York] investigation, too?TRUMP: About which?HABERMAN: The S.D.N.Y. investigation. Because there’s two. There’s Mueller, and then there’s the Cohen investigation.TRUMP: I don’t know about that. That I don’t know about.HABERMAN: Rod has never said anything to you about whether you’re a target at all in terms of what they were looking for on Cohen? Has that ever come up?TRUMP: No. I don’t. We didn’t discuss it.AIDE: Mr. President, we’re coming up on 45 minutes.TRUMP: Yeah, that’s O.K. Rod told me I’m not a target of the investigation.HABERMAN: He did?TRUMP: He did. He told me.HABERMAN: Do you remember how long ago he said that?TRUMP: I think the lawyers would speak to him a lot about that. Not a lot. But a number of times. He never said — I never asked him that question.HABERMAN: But your lawyers have?TRUMP: The lawyers ask him. They say, “He’s not a target of the investigation.”BAKER: Can I ask, speaking of Mr. Cohen, you’ve said that investigators should be looking at his father-in-law. What did you mean by that?TRUMP: Well, that’s what I’ve heard. I’ve heard his father-in-law was — I’m not saying investigation.______________BAKER: Can I ask, on the record, what’s the purpose of saying that? Some people are wondering whether or not this kind of thing might count as witness tampering, that you’re kind of publicly —TRUMP: It’s not witness tampering. It’s not witness tampering at all. It’s not witness tampering.BAKER: What’s your purpose, then? Help us understand that.TRUMP: I did have to read what I said. What did I say? I don’t know. What did I say?HABERMAN: Just that people ought to be taking a look at Michael Cohen’s father-in-law. And House Democrats have said they thought that —TRUMP: Well, I will say this: I think people have the right to speak their mind. You know, speaking your mind. I’ve heard that for a period of time. But other people have said it, too. I mean, many people have said it.HABERMAN: I want to switch back to something I wanted to ask you about before: You talked about, accurately, that you won in part because you’ve talked about these foreign engagements.TRUMP: Because of what?HABERMAN: Ending foreign engagements. And you have said we’re not going to lecture the world. But you seem to be leaving open the idea of a military option in Venezuela. Am I reading that right?TRUMP: It’s true.HABERMAN: Why there, and not 100 other countries?TRUMP: Well, I’m not saying I’m doing anything in terms of the military option in Venezuela. But I can say very pointedly we’re not taking that off the table.HABERMAN: Why is that?TRUMP: We’re involved in wars that are 6,000 miles away. We’re involved in wars where it’s just absolutely insane what we’re doing, and the money we’re spending, where in Afghanistan, we’re spending $50 billion. That’s more than most countries spend for everything.HABERMAN: But why leave it open in Venezuela as opposed to somewhere — what is it about Venezuela specifically?TRUMP: Well, I think I’m not closing. I don’t close it anywhere. I don’t close it. Somebody just asked me, “Is there a military option?” I said all options are on the table. I’m not taking anything off the table.BAKER: In Saudi Arabia, when you were in Saudi Arabia and I was with you, sir, and you said in Riyadh, “We’re not going to lecture you, we’re not going to tell you how to run your countries.” What about Venezuela seems different than that? Because obviously it’s a terrible situation there, but there are terrible situations in a lot of places.MAGGIE: Peter’s asking it better than I did.TRUMP: There are terrible things happening in Venezuela.BAKER: Absolutely.TRUMP: I have access to things, Peter, that are absolutely terrible, what’s going on in Venezuela.BAKER: So that makes it an exception, in effect, to your standard you talked about in Saudi Arabia, of not lecturing other countries?TRUMP: I’m just saying this: Terrible things are going on. Terrible things are going on in Venezuela. And I look at that, and I see what’s happening. Now in Saudi Arabia, a lot of improvement has been made in Saudi Arabia. But you look at Iran, and they kill many, many people in Iran. You have the access and we have the access also. And Saudi Arabia also has a lot to do with economic development. They’re a country that pays us a tremendous amount of money, creates a tremendous amount of jobs. And Saudi Arabia, I’m not making excuses for anybody. I think that was a terrible event. It was a terrible tragedy. It was a terrible crime.HABERMAN: [The journalist Jamal] Khashoggi?TRUMP: Yeah. Khashoggi. I thought it was a terrible crime. But if you look at other countries, many other countries. You look at Iran, not so far away from Saudi Arabia, and take a look at what they’re doing there. So you know, that’s just the way I feel. Venezuela is very much in flux. We’ve been hearing about it for probably 14 years now, between the two of them. And some terrible things are happening in Venezuela. So if I can do something to help people. It’s really helping humanity, if we can do something to help people, I’d like to do that.BAKER: What’d you say to Mr. [Juan] Guaidó, the opposition leader that you talked to?TRUMP: We had a very good talk. Just more than anything else, I guess, I wished him good luck. It’s a dangerous journey. He’s in a very dangerous place. And it’s a very dangerous journey. I watched him —______________HABERMAN: There was a report that you were upset when you saw the Senate testimony of Bill Barr [the nominee for attorney general], when he was talking about his personal closeness with Robert Mueller. Were you surprised by that? And —TRUMP: No. I didn’t know Bill Barr, but I’ve always heard he was an outstanding man.HABERMAN: Did that bother you?TRUMP: And that’s what I wanted for that position.HABERMAN: It doesn’t bother you that he’s friendly with Bob Mueller? That’s not a —TRUMP: I did hear the statement and it was totally acceptable to me. I just want somebody that’s a very outstanding person and who’s going to be — I think he has a chance to be a great attorney general.And they need it. They really need it. I mean they — You see what’s happening. There’s been turmoil between the Justice Department, the F.B.I. You look at all of the statements made. You look at all of the firings, not firings by me, by the way. But you look at all of the people that have left and been fired and terminated and all of the terrible statements being made. And it is a terrible thing that’s gone on there.BAKER: Have you talked about what he should do once he takes over, about those things?TRUMP: Very little. I’ll tell you what: What I talked about is the fact — I went into his past almost two years of being attorney general. I went into his life, as a, you know, after being the attorney general, which was very successful. He’s had a very successful life, Bill Barr. He’s very respected. I didn’t know him, you know, until this whole situation — until, you know, it was time to look for an attorney general. So many people recommended him. So many people.BAKER: [inaudible]TRUMP: And again this isn’t somebody — and I think I probably would be able to put up somebody that I know very well. I mean Kennedy used his brother, and so I would have been able to. But I wanted somebody that was respected. I think that he did very well at the hearing, really well, as well as, some people say it was as good as you can do. And I think he’ll be a great attorney general. I certainly hope so.BAKER: Were you aware of the memo that he had written and submitted to I think the White House counsel criticizing Mueller’s approach.TRUMP: I did not know that.HABERMAN: You didn’t know that?TRUMP: I did not know. I mean, I read it afterwards. But I did not know.BAKER: Did you know it when you picked him or you didn’t know it at the time?TRUMP: I didn’t see the memo. I never read the memo.HABERMAN: Since you’re still in the middle of this negotiations about the continuing resolution, about the wall funding —TRUMP: Yeah.HABERMAN: This is your first experience dealing with Nancy Pelosi having the gavel as the speaker. Do you feel that you properly estimated her strengths?TRUMP: Yeah, I did. I did. I’ve actually always gotten along with her, but now I don’t think I will anymore. I think that she’s hurting the country very badly. I think she’s doing a tremendous disservice to the country. If she doesn’t approve a wall, the rest of it’s just a waste of money and time and energy because it’s, it’s desperately needed. People are flowing in.I mean, we have caravans coming in right now, 12,000 people. We have three of them lined up. And you know they’re lining up from Honduras and Guatemala and El Salvador. And they’re coming in.With a wall, you don’t need very much help. We just had to move more military down there to handle the one that’s coming up now: 12,000 people or whatever it might be. But they say it’s about 12,000 people.No, I think Nancy Pelosi is hurting our country very badly by doing what she’s doing. And ultimately I think I’ve set the table very nicely.BAKER: For —HABERMAN: For what?TRUMP: Well, they understand, Peter. They didn’t know what was going on with the southern border. Now they know. They had no idea the amount of crime, the amount of drugs, the amount of human trafficking, which can be stopped with a proper system —BAKER: So set the table for emergency declaration.TRUMP: I’ve set the table. I’ve set the stage for doing what I’m going to do.BAKER: And you’ll wait out the 21 days before you take any action?TRUMP: Yeah, I’m going to wait until the 15th. I think it’s a waste of time —[Crosstalk]TRUMP: Well, based on everything I hear. Now they’ll probably be overly generous with things that you don’t need in terms of money. They’ll give you more money than you need for things that won’t help very much. And they’ll give you money for good things, too. But based on what I hear and based on what I read, they don’t want to give money for the wall.You know I’m building the wall. You know that. I’m building the wall right now. I’m building — it’s been funded, and we’re buying it right. And we’re renovating large sections of wall. We’re building new sections of wall. We’re building the wall. The wall is going up as we speak. We’ll be up to, by the end of this year, 115 miles.[inaudible]TRUMP: At least.AIDE: That’s either finished or under construction.TRUMP: And that doesn’t include large amounts of wall that we’ll be starting before the end of the year. So we’ll be up to hundreds of miles of wall between new wall and renovation wall in a fairly short period of time. It’s the one thing. So I’m building the wall now, as we speak. And I’ll continue to build the wall, and we’ll get the wall finished. Now whether or not I declare a national emergency, that you’ll see.HABERMAN: You tweeted, sir, I guess it was yesterday, these all days feel like one day, but you tweeted that essentially that your intel chiefs, and this is what we were talking about earlier, needed to go back to school. You have at various points taken issue with things that your government has told you on climate change, on ISIS, on what we saw, though I understand that you’re saying you think the press misrepresented what was said..TRUMP: Well, you’ll have to see, I mean you’ll have to see. And you should call Dan and you should call Gina. I would like you to. You know them [inaudible].HABERMAN: But just broadly, sir: Why do you find yourself at odds with your government —TRUMP: I don’t.HABERMAN: — and why do you feel in terms of what the advice —[Crosstalk]TRUMP: Well, first of all, when I walked into the room, there’s your picture, I guess you have it. [Hands reporters a photograph of intelligence chiefs meeting with him.] But when I walked into the room, I said, “What’s the story with Iran?”[Inaudible]“We were totally misrepresented.”I said, “What are you talking about?”“They misrepresented — ”HABERMAN: There was that time, though. What about the other times with climate change, or —TRUMP: Well, you have to really take a look at everybody else. And if you would have been here today, and you would have seen this whole side of the room filled up with secretaries and people that are running government, you would have said, I don’t get, I don’t have a problem with anybody. I don’t dispute anything.You’re talking about very little by comparison to the people that we’re talking about. Great relationship with Mike Pompeo. That was a great choice. Great relationship with — Sonny Perdue is fantastic. Agriculture. He was very happy because China said we’re going to buy tremendous amounts of farm products, O.K., agriculture products, in front of him. It was a gesture — a very big gesture — but it was a gesture. Very substantial amount of product. And he said he’s starting today, which is pretty amazing. You know we’re not going to have an agreement for a little while yet, if we have an agreement.So when you look at the overall government, there’s really very little dispute.I mean Sarah, could I ask you two to speak up about that?SANDERS: Yeah, I think the report you’re referring to is the climate change thing is a career official’s report, so it’s not his appointees. And there’s a lot of people within your administration —TRUMP: You have a lot of people that are in from other administrations that frankly you keep because you’re not allowed to do anything but keep them, O.K.? And so they’ll do reports. And by the way, you’re going to have people that are from my administration in years from now that would be very critical of perhaps another president where they disagree with something.But as you know, you have many, many people in this administration and every other administration that wasn’t put there by me, and they have to stay there. It’s a job for life.HABERMAN: You mean civil servants —TRUMP: And they can be critical. And just like we put in a lot of great people, they’ll be critical into the future. That doesn’t happen at The New York Times.Related CoverageTrump, in Interview, Calls Wall Talks ‘Waste of Time’ and Dismisses InvestigationsJan. 31, 2019ImageFact-Checking President Trump’s Interview With The New York TimesFeb. 1, 2019Image5 Takeaways From The Times’s Interview With President TrumpJan. 31, 2019ImageTrump Discusses Claims of ‘Fake News,’ and Their Impact, With New York Times PublisherFeb. 1, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsU.S. Congress, Dubai, Grammys: Your Monday Briefing - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexBriefingSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperBriefing|U.S. Congress, Dubai, Grammys: Your Monday BriefingAdvertisementSupported byU.S. Congress, Dubai, Grammys: Your Monday BriefingLet us help you start your day. By Penn BullockFeb. 11, 2019(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. Another government shutdown looming in the U.S., a princess’ worrying fate in Dubai and a clue to the Russia investigation. Here’s the latest: ImageMembers of the U.S. military installing concertina wire along the Rio Grande at the border with Mexico in Laredo, Tex., in November. CreditEric Gay/Associated PressU.S. on course for another partial government shutdownBipartisan negotiations to avert a shutdown by a deadline of this Friday have broken down. Congressional Democrats and Republicans had hoped to be finalizing an agreement by now. But they have largely stopped communicating about a compromise that would keep the government open while allocating some money for border security and barriers.The sticking point: Talks collapsed over Democrats’ effort to force Immigration and Customs Enforcement to limit the number of beds in its detention centers to 16,500 by focusing on detaining migrants with criminal records instead of people who have overstayed their visas. Behind the scenes: President Trump vowed to build his promised wall “one way or the other,” and officials are in what one described as a surreal scramble to map how he might declare a national emergency to do so. One proposal is to claim that the wall would be built to protect the thousands of troops now operating near the border or deploying there soon. ImageYellow Vest protesters in Lyon, France, on Saturday.CreditAlex Martin/Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesIn France, a tableau of chaos in week 13 of the Yellow VestsAbout 51,000 people marched in Paris and southern French cities on Saturday, according to the police. Windows were smashed, a protester was severely injured when a police “sting-ball grenade” that he had tried to pick up exploded in his hand, and an antiterrorism unit’s car burned near the Eiffel Tower. Big picture: Turnout was about one-fifth the size of the first Yellow Vest demonstration, in mid-November, and down from 84,000 in mid-January.The Yellow Vests’ demands about the cost of living have grown more nebulous, but the movement remains popular with the public and unmoved by concessions from President Emmanuel Macron, whose popularity has somewhat risen despite their insistent calls for his resignation.Protests in Spain: Two days before the start of a landmark trial of 12 Catalan separatist leaders, tens of thousands of right-leaning protesters gathered in Madrid on Sunday, calling for the ouster of Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez and denouncing his proposal for talks to ease the secessionist conflict in Catalonia.ImageA selfie taken by Sheikha Latifa, left, with her friend as they tried to escape Dubai last year.Disappearance of a princess sheds light on Dubai’s dark sideSheikha Latifa — one of 30 children of Dubai’s ruler, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum — tried to escape to the U.S. through India last March, informing her friends that she would soon be free.Less than a week later, she went silent, and in December her family released photos of her back at home that heightened questions about her condition. Her case has since become a stain on Dubai’s globalized image.Background: In a secret video she recorded before her planned departure from Dubai, Sheikha Latifa described a life spent in a gilded cage.She said she had first tried to escape the kingdom many years ago, but was taken back and held in solitary confinement for more than three years, during which time she was frequently beaten and deprived of medical care.When she was released at 19, she still wasn’t free to study medicine, as she wanted, or to travel.Analysis: Like the accounts of women who have tried to escape Saudi Arabia, Sheikha Latifa’s case has punctured the glittering image of Dubai — behind which it is a repressive state — and served as a reminder of the limitations on women there, regardless of status or nationality.ImageAn aerial view of the mud and waste after a dam spill in Brazil.CreditAntonio Lacerda/EPA, via ShutterstockHow a dam gave way in BrazilWhen a mining dam collapsed in the town of Brumadinho last month, it unleashed a deluge of toxic mud that stretched for five miles, killing more than 150 people and crushing homes and offices.The tragedy was hardly a surprise, experts told us.Analysis: Brazil has 88 mining dams built like the one that failed: enormous reservoirs of mining waste held back by little more than walls of sand and silt.Even more alarming, at least 28 sit directly uphill from cities or towns, with more than 100,000 people living in especially risky areas if the dams failed, an estimate by The New York Times found.How we know: Our team interviewed engineers and locals to take an expansive look at the disaster, reconstructing the mud’s deadly journey and illustrating how these dams are built and what led the one in Brumadinho to crumble.Here’s what else is happeningRussia investigation: A prosecutor for the special counsel, Robert Mueller, made cryptic comments in a court hearing last week that suggest that investigators are pursuing the question of whether there was any kind of deal between Russia and the Trump campaign, centered on U.S. sanctions relief.Romania: When Laura Codruta Kovesi was in charge of the country’s antigraft agency, she generated a furious backlash by taking on entrenched corruption. Now that she is in the running to be the first public prosecutor for the E.U., Romania’s justice minister is trying to scuttle her appointment.Britain: A week after a London woman became the first in the country to be convicted by a jury over the genital cutting of her daughter, a bill to enhance protections for children at risk of genital cutting was blocked in the House of Commons by a single objection, that of a veteran Conservative lawmaker. ImageThe beach of a four-year-old island, with the much older Hunga Ha'apai island in the background.CreditDan SlaybackHunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai: The young island in the South Pacific, birthed in an underwater volcano eruption four years ago and part of Tonga, could hold clues about how water might have shaped similar features on Mars billions of years ago. Grammys: Childish Gambino’s “This Is America” won for song of the year, and Michelle Obama made a surprise appearance as Alicia Keys hosted music’s top awards show. Here is our commentary as events unfolded, a full list of winners and looks from the red carpet. Germany: In a country with an ingrained distrust of spy agencies, Chancellor Angela Merkel inaugurated a vast new headquarters for the nation’s intelligence service in the heart of Berlin. London Zoo: A rare male Sumatran tiger was paired with a female in a risky matchmaking operation, and on their first meeting, on Friday, he mauled her to death, prompting questions about whether the tragedy could have been avoided. Prince Philip: At 97, the husband of Queen Elizabeth II has given up his driver’s license, a month after a collision on a rural road north of London raised questions about his abilities behind the wheel. Gender equality on the waves: Female surfers are fighting to break into the male-dominated arena of big-wave contests — and to be paid as much as their male counterparts.Smarter Living Tips for a more fulfilling life.ImageCreditDavid Malosh for The New York TimesRecipe of the day: Transform cauliflower into a weeknight vegan curry. (Sign up for the Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter for more recipe recommendations.)Word of the day: gynandromorph. An organism that has both male and female physical characteristics in various parts of its body, like this rare cardinal bird.Is your child spending money on in-app purchases? We compiled ways to avoid “bait apps.”Back Story It was 1983, and 47 million people in the U.S. were watching Michael Jackson moonwalk across the stage to his hit “Billie Jean” during a TV special.ImageMichael Jackson during the performance that immortalized the moonwalk.CreditPaul Drinkwater/NBC/NBCU Photo Bank, via Getty ImagesThe performance immortalized a move that recently re-entered the public consciousness when Virginia’s governor, Ralph Northam, who is white, said he had dressed as Jackson and done the moonwalk during a dance contest in 1984.In Jackson’s 1988 autobiography, which shares its name with the famous move, he describes the moonwalk as “a ‘popping’ type of thing that black kids had created dancing on street corners in the ghetto.”The moonwalk had been performed for decades by a range of entertainers (albeit often by a more literal name, the backslide). But it was the King of Pop who would be remembered, as one dance critic put it, “coasting backward across the stage, step by gliding step, as if on a cushion of air.”Chris Stanford, on the briefings team, wrote today’s Back Story.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsTrump Returns This Weekend to Mar-a-Lago, His Gilded Comfort Zone - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Trump Returns This Weekend to Mar-a-Lago, His Gilded Comfort ZoneAdvertisementSupported byTrump Returns This Weekend to Mar-a-Lago, His Gilded Comfort ZoneImagePresident Trump will visit Mar-a-Lago, his club in Palm Beach, Fla., for the first time since Thanksgiving.CreditCreditSarah Silbiger/The New York TimesBy Katie Rogers and Annie KarniJan. 31, 2019WASHINGTON — After two months spent scorching the earth in Washington and complaining about being cooped up in the White House, President Trump is planning to return this weekend to the one place where he knows he will receive a hero’s welcome for his troubles: Mar-a-Lago, his gilded club by the sea in Palm Beach.“You would have to be insensitive not to be touched by how he has stayed there working,” said Toni Holt Kramer, the founder of Trumpettes USA, a booster group that is planning to welcome him. “I think people will have tears in their eyes because they’re so grateful that he’s come back to his home away from home.”Mr. Trump made a point of staying in Washington over the Christmas holidays — waiting, he said, for Democrats to negotiate with him on funding for a border wall — so it will be the president’s first visit to Mar-a-Lago since Thanksgiving.It will not be a complete escape — he still has no deal on the wall and a State of the Union address to give on Tuesday. But after his arrival on Friday afternoon, Mr. Trump is expected to do many of the things he always does when he is at Mar-a-Lago: dining at the owner’s table on the patio; spending the afternoon at Trump International Golf Club, about a 15-minute motorcade drive away; and never venturing anywhere in Palm Beach outside his own two properties.The first lady, Melania Trump, will travel there with him this weekend, her spokeswoman said, though Mrs. Trump tends to keep a low profile while at the resort.In the Mar-a-Lago cocoon, the president is in his most comfortable mode, friends and allies say: playing the jocular host in front of an adoring crowd.On Saturday, P.J. Schrantz, who founded Veleve, a charity that provides support for veterans, is betting on Mr. Trump to make an appearance at a $600-a-plate fund-raiser his organization is hosting in one of the club’s ballrooms. And plans for Mr. Trump’s annual Super Bowl viewing party at his golf club on Sunday evening, complete with a steak and lobster buffet, are still on.“I chose to have it there because I’ve attended galas there,” Mr. Schrantz said of his event, which will feature a George Michael tribute artist donating his time, as well as honor the astronaut Buzz Aldrin. “The members are such giving people that we could raise a couple of million dollars in an evening.”Some Mar-a-Lago members say they are already wistful about the blissful weeks without tangled traffic and increased security — a seven-minute drive from home to the club takes at least 30 minutes when Mr. Trump is in town, one said — but many will brave the roads for the chance to participate in a presidential selfie or a similar show of support.Laurence Leamer, a longtime Palm Beach resident who has known Mr. Trump since the 1990s and is the author of “Mar-a-Lago: Inside the Gates of Power at Donald Trump’s Presidential Palace,” said in an interview that even if people had an issue with the president’s policymaking, the meatloaf recipe or anything in between, they tended to keep it to themselves.“People have been trained to have like a Pavlovian reaction or something,” Mr. Leamer said. “You’re supposed to say things are great. When he asks you, ‘How are things?’ you’re not supposed to complain.”Just as the Trump International Hotel in Washington has become a safe space for the president and his supporters, Mar-a-Lago is a 20-acre oasis for those who adore all things Trump, from his zero-tolerance immigration policies to the menu items named after his children.The focus on Mr. Trump has grown to the point where some Democratic members, who have loved the club’s amenities for decades, have recently rescinded their memberships because they do not feel comfortable there anymore.ImageSupporters lined up in Palm Beach to greet Mr. Trump in November. Mar-a-Lago has become an oasis for those who adore all things Trump.CreditSarah Silbiger/The New York Times“There’s a political angle to being a member now,” said Cynthia Friedman, a Democratic fund-raiser who joined the club 24 years ago and recalls playing tennis on Saturdays with Marla Maples, Mr. Trump’s second wife. “There are a lot of people who I don’t recognize. They’re not the people I used to play tennis with. Things change, and it’s time to move on.”In December, instead of sending her $1,600 in monthly dues, she joined the Beach Club, a rival members-only club, on the other side of town.But Ms. Friedman is still in the minority. Many Mar-a-Lago members book reservations weeks in advance to be in the same room with the president. And Trumpworld celebrities, like Anthony Scaramucci, the former White House communications director; the president’s son Donald Trump Jr.; and Antonio Sabato Jr., the Trump-loving model-turned-politician, have been spotted at social events and fund-raisers in Palm Beach, serving as something of a warm-up act to the main event.Karyn Turk, a business owner and the 2016 winner of the Mrs. Florida beauty pageant, said if the walls looked like they were caving in on the president in Washington, there were only blue skies in Palm Beach.“It’s a lot of hype,” she said of the special counsel investigation, led by Robert S. Mueller III. “I feel like in a lot of ways, it’s still just a witch hunt.”If the “Winter White House” is a boon for the members of Mr. Trump’s exclusive club, and a respite not only for the president but also for the staff members who relocate with him, the annual decampment still raises ethical concerns.The White House has refused to release a list of those who visit the president there. And elsewhere in the Trump Organization orbit, the company said it would introduce new procedures to screen for undocumented immigrants after The New York Times reported that Mr. Trump’s flagship New Jersey golf club employed people who had entered the country illegally.And ProPublica reported last summer that three Mar-a-Lago members had amassed an unusual amount of influence in the Department of Veterans Affairs, meddling in agency initiatives and participating in the review of a contract worth some $10 billion.“It certainly seems unprecedented,” said Noah Bookbinder, the executive director of the ethics watchdog CREW, “and highly troubling for people to be given significant authority over government matters seemingly primarily on the basis of being paying customers of the president.”The White House has taken at least one informal step to block people who have access to the president’s properties from asking for anything that seems to go too far. Aides have long been on the alert to intercept any notes or policy proposals from overeager supporters — including one from a guest who once helpfully tried to show the president an executive order he had drafted. Mr. Trump has at times directed his aides to give those people ample listening time even if he cannot, according to someone familiar with the process and his thinking.Security around the president may have tightened since 2017, when Mr. Trump sat on the open patio, in front of hundreds of eyeballs and iPhones pointed in his direction, discussing a response to North Korea’s missile test with Shinzo Abe, the Japanese prime minister. But in many ways, Mr. Trump himself has not changed from the involved club owner he has always been.He has always kept close watch over who comes and goes, and pays close attention to those in the latter category.Jeff Greene, the Palm Beach billionaire who ran unsuccessfully in the Democratic primary for governor of Florida, joined the club when he moved to Palm Beach in 2010. But he quit because, he said, “I have my own tennis court. I never loved going there.”Mr. Trump, he said, took his resignation personally. Sitting next to him at a charity event at Mar-a-Lago, Mr. Greene recalled being confronted. “He went right at me, saying, ‘I can’t believe you quit the club.’ He’s figuring someone with plenty of money, why would they care about paying dues for a club?”A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: After Long Time Away, President Plans Return To Gilded Comfort Zone. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageMar-a-Lago, the Future Winter White House and Home of the Calmer TrumpJan. 1, 2017ImageTrump’s ‘Winter White House’: A Peek at the Exclusive Members’ List at Mar-a-LagoFeb. 18, 2017ImageFor Trump, a Glittering Gala Ends a Winter Vacation Rooted in RoutineDec. 31, 2017ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsRalph Northam, New England Patriots, El Salvador: Your Monday Briefing - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexBriefingSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperBriefing|Ralph Northam, New England Patriots, El Salvador: Your Monday BriefingAdvertisementSupported byRalph Northam, New England Patriots, El Salvador: Your Monday BriefingBy Chris StanfordFeb. 4, 2019(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning,We start today with President Trump’s strategy in Iraq, the fallout from a racist photograph in Virginia, and another Super Bowl title for the Patriots.President Trump outlines his foreign policy prioritiesThe president said in an interview broadcast on Sunday that he planned to maintain an American military presence in Iraq in order to monitor neighboring Iran, even as he moves to withdraw troops from Syria and Afghanistan.The U.S. has been negotiating with Iraq for weeks to allow perhaps hundreds of American troops in Syria to shift to bases in Iraq and strike the Islamic State from there. About 5,200 U.S. troops are currently in Iraq.Another angle: In the same interview, on CBS’s “Face the Nation,” Mr. Trump wouldn’t commit to making public the results of the special counsel’s investigation into Russian ties to his campaign. The law doesn’t require the Justice Department to release Robert Mueller’s report.Perspective: The war in Afghanistan is the longest in modern American history. “The troops have fought bravely,” The Times’s Editorial Board writes. “It’s time to bring them home.”Virginia Democrats fear for their agendaThe state’s Legislature is scheduled to meet today after Gov. Ralph Northam, a Democrat, resisted calls to resign over a racist photograph on his medical school yearbook page in 1984. Mr. Northam denied being one of the two men in the picture — one in blackface and the other in a Ku Klux Klan robe — after originally saying he was. State lawmakers from both parties said on Sunday that Mr. Northam’s fragile hold on power risked jeopardizing Democrats’ policy ambitions for the fall, when control of both of Virginia’s legislative chambers will be up for grabs.Local reaction: For many Virginians, grappling with the scandal is as complicated as the state’s tragic racial history.News analysis: President Trump’s willingness to use race as a political weapon has pushed Democrats to confront misconduct in their ranks, one of our correspondents writes.Go deeper: “To live in this country in this century, and still be talking about white men impersonating black people, is to suspect that it’s probably always 1884 somewhere,” our critic at large writes.ImageJulian Edelman, left, and Tom Brady after the Patriots’ Super Bowl victory on Sunday. Edelman, a wide receiver, was named the game’s most valuable player.CreditDoug Mills/The New York TimesIt was a slog of a Super BowlIn a game only Patriots fans could love, New England beat the Los Angeles Rams, 13-3, on Sunday in the lowest-scoring Super Bowl ever.The Patriots, with six Super Bowl titles, are now tied with the Pittsburgh Steelers for the most. Here’s a look at the game’s lackluster statistics (not counting a record 65-yard punt).The ads: Off the field, the action wasn’t much more exciting, as brands steered clear of controversy. (Bud Light did pick an unexpected fight with … corn syrup.)The halftime show: Maroon 5, the quasi-soul, quasi-rock band, was the main attraction but turned in a performance that was “worthy of something much worse than derision: a shrug.” Read our music critic’s review.ImageJuan Guaidó, second from right, comforted Ana Cecilia Buitrago in Caracas, Venezuela, on Sunday. Ms. Buitrago’s son was recently killed by security forces during a demonstration.CreditMeridith Kohut for The New York TimesVenezuelan insurgent rallies supportJuan Guaidó, the young lawmaker leading an effort to topple the country’s authoritarian government, visited ordinary Venezuelans and fielded phone calls from world leaders over the weekend as he tried to get government insiders to turn on President Nicolás Maduro.Despite Mr. Guaidó’s growing support after declaring himself the country’s legitimate interim leader two weeks ago, Mr. Maduro still holds many of the levers of power. They include the state broadcaster, a compliant judiciary, military leaders and ruthless paramilitary forces.What’s next: Shipments of humanitarian aid from Mr. Guaidó’s international allies are expected to begin arriving in Venezuela this week. The assistance could be pivotal to Mr. Guaidó’s movement, which has stirred hope for millions of Venezuelans.If you have 18 minutes, this is worth itBehind the Lion Air crashImageCreditMatt Mcknight/ReutersIn upgrading its 737, a plane that first went into service half a century ago, Boeing wanted innovation — but not so much that the Federal Aviation Administration would require expensive, time-consuming retraining for pilots.The result was the 737 Max, pictured above. Our extensive reporting shows how Boeing’s strategy set off a series of engineering, business and regulatory decisions that would leave the company facing questions years later about the deadly crash in Indonesia.Here’s what else is happeningA papal first: Pope Francis arrived in the United Arab Emirates on Sunday, seeking to improve relations with the Muslim world. He is the first pontiff to visit the Arabian Peninsula. El Salvador election: Nayib Bukele, a 37-year-old who promoted himself as a corruption fighter, won the country’s presidential election on Sunday.Fatal subway shooting: A man died on a platform in Queens on Sunday after being shot during a fight. It was the first killing on New York City’s transit system in more than six month, but crime on the subway has been increasing. No charges for Michael Avenatti: The lawyer for the pornographic film actress Stormy Daniels won’t face criminal charges after being arrested in November on suspicion of domestic violence.ImageCreditHenry Nicholls/ReutersSnapshot: Above, clowns attended an annual memorial service in London on Sunday for Joseph Grimaldi, a 19th-century English entertainer who popularized clowns’ makeup.What we’re reading: This thread on Ava DuVernay’s Twitter account. “The filmmaker posted a two-minute video from 1967 of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. as he answered an
interviewer’s question about how black Americans, of all the ethnic groups in the U.S., still suffered,” writes the briefings editor, Andrea Kannapell. “King’s answer is a master class, and the posts that follow add more detail to his points.”Now, a break from the newsImageCreditAndrew Scrivani for The New York TimesCook: This comforting lentil soup couldn’t be easier.Watch: A new month means new titles available on streaming services in the U.S. and Canada. For February, a bunch of great documentaries arrived on HBO, Amazon and Hulu.Listen: Quiet, nightmarish and nursery-rhyme catchy, Billie Eilish’s new track “Bury a Friend” is matter-of-fact about mourning’s connection to death wishes, writes Jon Pareles.See: Justin Peck’s latest choreography for New York City Ballet. “Principia” is “youthful, ardent, inventive, sincere,” Brian Seibert writes.Smarter Living: If you’re trying to make your work space more ergonomic, having the right chair is crucial. Get an adjustable one if you can. The seat should be wide enough to give your hips a clear inch on either side, and shallow enough that the edge doesn’t hit you behind the knees when you sit back. And do sit back — it eases spinal compression.We also have suggestions for wellness products to add to your “wedding day survival kit.”And now for the Back Story on …A special obituary projectFebruary is Black History Month, and The Times has put together a special presentation of its Overlooked series, featuring 13 prominent black men and women whose deaths weren’t previously noted in our report.The editor of the collection, Amisha Padnani, described what she discovered through the stories of figures like Scott Joplin, the ragtime master; Gladys Bentley, a gender-bending blues singer; and Major Taylor, the first black world champion in cycling.ImageClockwise from top left: Nina Mae McKinney, Alfred Hair, Oscar Micheaux, Gladys Bentley, Mary Ellen Pleasant, Major Taylor and Philip A. Payton Jr.“Many of them were a generation removed from slavery,” she wrote. “To carve a name for themselves, they sometimes had to make myth out of a painful history, misrepresenting their past to gain a better footing in their future.”“They were ambitious and creative, becoming painters and composers, filmmakers and actors,” she added. “Others used their imaginations to invent and innovate. Often they felt an unspoken greater mission to break the constraints society placed on their race.”The project was created in partnership with Past Tense, a new team at The Times that is delving into the paper’s archives to bring to life compelling stories from the past. Use this form to nominate a candidate for future Overlooked obituaries.That’s it for this briefing. Remember the Instagram egg? The subject of the site’s most-liked post featured in an ad last night to promote mental health services. See you next time.— ChrisThank youTo Eleanor Stanford and James K. Williamson for the break from the news. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.P.S.• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about the possible peace deal with the Taliban in Afghanistan.• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: Breast, thigh or wing (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here. • In March, The Times released “Diversity 2017,” a report on its efforts to create a more diverse and inclusive work culture. Correction: Feb. 4, 2019An earlier version of this briefing referred incorrectly to a record shared by the New England Patriots and the Pittsburgh Steelers. The teams have each won six Super Bowl titles, not six N.F.L. titles.Correction: Feb. 6, 2019An earlier version of this briefing, using information from the New York Police Department, referred incorrectly to a fatal shooting at a subway station in Queens last weekend. It was the first recorded killing on the subway in just over six months, not a year.Chris Stanford is based in London and writes the U.S. version of the Morning Briefing. He also compiles a weekly news quiz. He was previously a producer for the desktop home page and mobile site, helping to present The New York Times’s news report to readers. Before joining The Times in 2013, he was an editor and designer at The Washington Post and other news organizations.
@stanfordc AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsState of the Union, Ralph Northam, Chinese New Year: Your Tuesday Briefing - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexBriefingSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperBriefing|State of the Union, Ralph Northam, Chinese New Year: Your Tuesday BriefingAdvertisementSupported byState of the Union, Ralph Northam, Chinese New Year: Your Tuesday BriefingBy Chris StanfordFeb. 5, 2019(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning,We start today with the deepening investigation into President Trump’s inaugural committee, a preview of tonight’s State of the Union address and a look at the rift between leaders in Virginia.Prosecutors seek inaugural committee’s recordsFederal prosecutors ordered on Monday that officials from President Trump’s inaugural committee turn over documents about donors, finances and activities, according to two people familiar with the investigation.The subpoena expands an inquiry opened last year. Investigators are interested in whether any foreigners donated to the inaugural committee; such gifts are illegal.No one who worked for the committee, including its chairman, Thomas Barrack, has been accused of wrongdoing.Background: The investigation grew from the one into Michael Cohen, President Trump’s former personal lawyer. Mr. Cohen’s case was referred to federal prosecutors in Manhattan by the office of the special counsel, Robert Mueller.Wall looms over State of the Union addressPresident Trump is expected to focus on immigration in tonight’s speech, which was postponed by the partial government shutdown, and he will probably reiterate his demand for
a wall on the southern border. He is not expected to declare a national emergency, a fallback plan that would circumvent Congress but that Republicans have warned could divide the party.Mr. Trump is also expected to announce a plan to stop transmission of H.I.V. by 2030. Here’s what to watch for in the speech, which begins at 9 p.m. Eastern. We’ll have live coverage and analysis.The details: Thirteen guests will join Mr. Trump and his wife, Melania, at the Capitol. Stacey Abrams, who narrowly lost a race for Georgia governor last year, will deliver the Democrats’ official response.Looking back: We examined how much progress Mr. Trump has made in achieving goals set out in last year’s State of the Union address. Those include passing an immigration overhaul, bringing down drug prices and revamping American infrastructure.ImageGov. Ralph Northam held a news conference in Richmond, Va., last weekend.CreditParker Michels-Boyce for The New York TimesPolitical turmoil in Virginia deepensGov. Ralph Northam told aides on Monday that he was not planning to step down after questions about a racist photograph that appeared on his medical school yearbook page.At the same time, Virginia’s lieutenant governor, Justin Fairfax, denied a woman’s claim that he had sexually assaulted her in 2004. He suggested that Mr. Northam’s allies were plotting to keep him from assuming the governor’s post if Mr. Northam resigned.“Everybody is shaking their heads; nobody knows what’s going to happen,” one state lawmaker said. “It might change in 15 minutes.”Another angle: The initial reports about Mr. Northam and Mr. Fairfax, both of whom are Democrats, were published by Big League Politics, a site that has promoted conspiracy theories favored by the far right.ImageSenator Michael Gianaris, center, attended a rally in Queens in November to oppose the subsidies being given to Amazon.CreditHiroko Masuike/The New York TimesFresh resistance to New York’s Amazon dealA critic of the $3 billion deal to bring the company to the city was named on Monday to a state board that could kill the arrangement.The State Senate’s selection of Senator Michael Gianaris, who represents the area of Queens where Amazon would like to build a campus, is a challenge to Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who must decide whether to reject the pick. Doing so could create a standoff with the Senate’s new majority leader, Andrea Stewart-Cousins, and other Democrats.What’s next: Mr. Cuomo has said that the Public Authorities Control Board must vote on the development plan for Amazon, which is expected to bring 25,000 to 40,000 jobs to the city. Company executives have said that they don’t expect the plan to go before the board until next year.If you have 9 minutes, this is worth itTech is splitting the U.S. work forceImageCreditDominic Valente for The New York TimesRobotics and automation mean that the growth in American jobs lies in businesses like hotels, restaurants and nursing homes, where wages are low and replacement by machines is less appealing.“Economists are reassessing their belief that technological progress lifts all boats,” writes our economic reporter, “and are beginning to worry about the new configuration of work.”Here’s what else is happeningThreat in the Himalayas: Rising temperatures in the region, home to most of the world’s tallest mountains, will melt at least one-third of its glaciers by 2100, according to a report released Monday.Taking sides on Venezuela: Most of the European Union’s member countries backed Juan Guaidó as the country’s legitimate leader, joining the U.S., Australia, Canada, and much of Latin America in withdrawing recognition of President Nicolás Maduro’s government.Presidential nominations: President Trump announced that he would nominate David Bernhardt, a former oil lobbyist and current deputy chief of the Interior Department, to lead the department. Mr. Trump also plans to nominate David Malpass, the under secretary of the Treasury for international affairs, to head the World Bank, administration officials said.Blunt talk from Pope Francis: In a speech in the United Arab Emirates, the pontiff mentioned the war in Yemen and called on Gulf countries to extend citizenship rights to religious minorities.ImageCreditiStock/Getty ImagesVideo: Ants are surprisingly sophisticated in their navigational strategies. Here’s how they sniff out the right path.Renovating MoMA: The Museum of Modern Art in New York City will close for four months starting in June as part of the final stage of its $400 million overhaul. The museum is reconfiguring its galleries to put a new focus on work by women and artists of color. Late-night comedy: Conan O’Brien on Sunday’s Super Bowl: “I found that to be — what is the opposite of a nail-biter? It was a nail-grower. I thought I was watching a baseball game.” What we’re reading: This BuzzFeed article. Alisha Haridasani Gupta, on the briefings team, writes: “Working all the time, answering emails in bed, living with our parents or taking on side gigs to save up on cash. These experiences have — unfortunately — become all too common for many millennials and, as this writer argues, it’s leading to widespread burnout.” Now, a break from the newsImageCreditRomulo Yanes for The New York TimesCook: A bowl of longevity noodles with chicken, ginger and mushrooms is a perfect dinner to celebrate the Lunar New Year. Listen: The bright, infectious instrumentation of Harry Nilsson’s “Gotta Get Up” belies the melancholy, wistful lyrics. The song appears often in the new Netflix series “Russian Doll.” Watch: Gina Rodriguez outsmarts a drug cartel in a scene from “Miss Bala,” narrated by the film’s director, Catherine Hardwicke.Go: At modern spas in the Italian Alps, tranquillity imposes itself by the very nature of the landscape.Smarter Living: When’s the last time you tidied up your digital life? For a data cleanse, back up your photographs, documents and other information (preferably using an automatic, online, off-site backup service), and run your system’s software update for the most recent security fixes.We also have guidance for making the transition to Medicare from other types of insurance.And now for the Back Story on …China’s most famous pigPeppa Pig’s feature-length movie “Peppa Celebrates Chinese New Year” debuts today for the start of the Year of the Pig. But, as illustrated in a heartwarming short film promoting the movie, most Chinese still don’t know “What is Peppa.”China’s most famous pig is Zhu Bajie (猪八戒), frequently called Pigsy in English. In the classic novel “Journey to the West,” he is one of three disciples protecting a monk on a quest to retrieve Buddhist scripture. He is bighearted, but his appetites get him into trouble.ImageThe character Zhu Bajie at a festival in Nanjing last month.CreditLi Xiaofei/VCG, via Getty ImagesThe 1958 animated short “Pigsy Eats Watermelon,” a landmark hit in a rapidly growing Chinese animation industry, tells the story of one episode from the novel in which he finds a watermelon and divides it into four pieces, intending to bring it to share with his comrades. Much to his embarrassment, however, he can’t stop himself from eating it all.That’s it for this briefing. See you next time.— ChrisThank youTo Eleanor Stanford and James K. Williamson for the break from the news. Albert Sun, an assistant editor who helped redesign the Morning Briefing, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.P.S.• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader.• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: English city near Manchester (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here. • The Times introduced a Chinese-language website on June 28, 2012. Access from within China has been blocked since October 2012. Correction: Feb. 5, 2019An earlier version of this briefing misstated the number of European Union countries that recognized Juan Guaidó as the legitimate leader of Venezuela on Monday. Most of the bloc’s 28 countries recognized Mr. Guaidó, not just seven.Chris Stanford is based in London and writes the U.S. version of the Morning Briefing. He also compiles a weekly news quiz. He was previously a producer for the desktop home page and mobile site, helping to present The New York Times’s news report to readers. Before joining The Times in 2013, he was an editor and designer at The Washington Post and other news organizations.
@stanfordc AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsBrexit, Trump, Serbia: Your Friday Briefing - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexBriefingSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperBriefing|Brexit, Trump, Serbia: Your Friday BriefingAdvertisementSupported byBrexit, Trump, Serbia: Your Friday BriefingLet us help you start your day. By Penn BullockJan. 31, 2019(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning. British business braces for impact, President Trump gives an interview to The Times, and European teenagers become a protest vanguard. Here’s the latest: ImageA stockpile of materials at Pressmark Pressings, which makes auto parts at a factory in Atherstone, about 100 miles northwest of London.CreditSuzie Howell for The New York TimesBritish businesses prepare for chaosCompanies across Britain, faced with confusion around the country’s pending departure from the E.U., have been stockpiling products, making backup plans and exploring new shipping routes. International banks are shifting thousands of jobs from Britain to the Continent.“It’s meant extra resources, extra overtime, to get it done,” said one executive. “It’s incredibly annoying.”By the numbers: Britain’s economy is 2.3 percent smaller than it would have been if voters in 2016 had opted to remain in the E.U., according to one research institution. And investment in the auto sector was found to have plunged by almost 50 percent in 2018.What’s next? Parliament remains mired in disagreement and the E.U. disinclined to reopen matters. Sixty days out from the March 29 deadline to leave the bloc, uncertainty is spreading.Come again? As a BBC anchor ended an evening news program by saying, “Theresa May says she intends to go back to Brussels to renegotiate her Brexit deal,” the screen showed grainy images of World War II planes that appeared to be Spitfires. Watch here. ImagePresident Trump in an interview with Times reporters Peter Baker, center, and Maggie Haberman on Thursday in the Oval Office. CreditTom Brenner for The New York TimesIn an Oval Office interview, Trump is discursive and defiantPresident Trump told our reporters in an 85-minute interview on Thursday that negotiations with Congress over his border wall were a “waste of time” and that he would proceed without lawmakers. This weekend he will retreat to Mar-a-Lago — his gilded club where all is well.Russia investigation: Mr. Trump denied an account by his former lawyer, Michael Cohen, that late in the 2016 presidential campaign he was still discussing a project to build a Trump-branded skyscraper in Moscow. He also claimed that his lawyers had been reassured by the outgoing deputy attorney general, Rod J. Rosenstein, that the president himself is not a target of the special counsel, Robert Mueller. Here are five takeaways from what Mr. Trump said.Trade: Mr. Trump spoke immediately after wrapping up a session with China’s visiting vice premier in which the president said they had made progress toward defusing the trade war. In other Washington news: The Senate voted to pass nonbinding bipartisan legislation that objects to Mr. Trump’s withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan and Syria, the second time in two months that the Senate has rebuked the president’s foreign policy.ImageA rally in Belgrade, Serbia, on Saturday against President Aleksandar Vucic. Such protests have become common in cities across Serbia since December. CreditDjordje Kojadinovic/ReutersSerbia’s president is sphinx-like as he is called dictatorial“Police investigators, tax officers, pro-government tabloids” have become the hammers of President Aleksandar Vucic and his populist, conservative Serbian Progressive Party. That was the testimony to the Council in Europe in November of Nebojsa Zelenovic, the mayor of Sabac, one of the few places not controlled by the governing party.Serbia has become a live wire of contradictions running through Mr. Vucic, a former information minister for the strongman Slobodan Milosevic who rebranded himself as a moderate. He faces intense protests as he both strives for E.U. membership and celebrates President Vladimir Putin of Russia. In an interview with The Times, he painted the protest movement as agitation against his risky plan to settle over Kosovo, and against E.U. membership. Mr. Zelenovic countered that “beneath that European surface, Vucic is a dictator.”Big picture: Last year, Borko Stefanovic, an opposition politician who speaks out about the overlap between government and organized crime, was attacked by three men and beaten viciously. He survived, and a protest movement of tens of thousands grew from early December to resist Mr. Vuvic and push pro-democratic measures. Quote: “I think that we belong to a very democratic society,” Mr. Vuvic said with characteristic calm.ImageStudents in Belgium rallying last month for measures to combat climate change.CreditYves Herman/ReutersEuropean teenagers mass against climate changeA loose-knit environmental movement has emerged in Europe over the past several weeks, and it’s driven by young people. Details: Tens of thousands of students skipped school in Belgium on Thursday to join demonstrations for action against climate change, the fourth consecutive Thursday of such action. Protests have sprung almost spontaneously from social media in France, Germany, Sweden, Switzerland and elsewhere. The inspiration of much of it is Greta Thunberg, a 16-year-old Swede who has called for school strikes against global warming.Impact: After meeting with climate activists this week, Prime Minister Charles Michel of Belgium said he was prepared to act, but he also alluded to the financial concerns of the “Yellow Vest” movement in France — a sign of tensions in Europe between fighting global warming on the one hand and economic troubles on the other. Here’s what else is happeningItaly: The country officially went into recession, and Europe as a whole is essentially at an economic standstill, a possible signal that the world is headed for a significant slowdown.India: The government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, which came into power five years ago vowing to create millions of jobs, has been accused of suppressing an official report on unemployment that apparently showed it had reached a 45-year high in 2017. E.U.-Iran relations: After months of delay, Britain, France and Germany unveiled a way to continue doing business with Iran despite U.S. sanctions. It is unclear when the vehicle, a new company called Instex, for bartering, will become operational. ImageOnly four stories and the restaurant of the Trump Hotel in Rio de Janeiro were open to guests in November 2016, as construction had stalled. The Trump Organization pulled out.CreditLianne Milton for The New York TimesTrump Organization: A slate of Brazilian investors have been arrested and charged with diverting pension money into a Trump-branded hotel project in Rio de Janeiro, from which the Trump campaign exited in December 2016 because of what it called construction delays. An international arrest warrant will be issued for the project’s mastermind, Paulo Figueiredo Filho — the grandson of the last dictator in the authoritarian government that ran Brazil from 1964 to 1985.Soccer and social justice: An increasing number of powerful sports executives have called for the release of a Bahrain-born soccer player, Hakeem al-Araibi, who has refugee status in Australia but has been detained in Thailand since late November. And in Britain, soccer clubs and their fans have emerged as an unlikely and vital resource for local food banks.11 days offline: Tonga, a remote island northeast of New Zealand, was forced into digital darkness after an underwater fiber-optic cable was severed on Jan. 20, cutting off internet connections, international calls and even credit card payments. Repairs are underway, and some connectivity has trickled back.Smarter Living Tips for a more fulfilling life.ImageCreditJulia Gartland for The New York Times.
Food Stylist: Ali Slagle.Recipe of the day: End the week with a glass of red wine and an Italian-American classic: pasta alla vodka.Does your office leave you with pain in your wrists, back or neck? Here’s how to make your workstation ergonomically correct.Unfamiliar with podcasts? Our connoisseur has recommendations to help you start.Back Story On this day in 1786, a Briton living in India delivered a discourse on a little-known proposition: that Sanskrit, Persian, Latin, Greek and other languages might have a common source.The commentary set off the field of comparative linguistics. Its fruits are known today as the concept of Proto-Indo-European, a mother language for dozens of tongues. The idea revolutionized not only the study of language, but also the sense of human history.The man who delivered the talk, Sir William Jones, was, predictably, a student of languages and culture. Less predictably, he was in India because he was also a legal expert — the same reason he ultimately became convinced of his theory.ImageSir William Jones, circa 1770.CreditHulton Archive, via Getty ImagesHe arrived many decades before the Raj, or British government rule. The British East India Company was increasing its control over territories where it had long traded. Some of the company’s officials wanted British justices like Jones to supervise the administration of Indian courts; translations from Sanskrit to English were crucial to that effort.Jones’s work with translators enabled his remarkable insights.Andrea Kannapell, the briefings editor, wrote today’s Back Story.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings.Check out this page to find a Morning Briefing for your region. (In addition to our European edition, we have Australian, Asian and U.S. editions.)Sign up here to receive an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights, and here’s our full range of free newsletters.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsJeff Bezos’ Extortion Claim Said to Be Under Review by Prosecutors - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexMediaSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperMedia|Jeff Bezos’ Extortion Claim Said to Be Under Review by ProsecutorsAdvertisementSupported byJeff Bezos’ Extortion Claim Said to Be Under Review by ProsecutorsImageIn attacking American Media Inc., Jeff Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon, showed he was willing to get dirty in the pursuit of victory.CreditCreditAndrew Harrer/BloombergBy Jim Rutenberg, Karen Weise and William K. RashbaumFeb. 8, 2019Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon and the owner of The Washington Post, did not become the world’s richest man by refusing to do what it takes to win. And now that he finds himself in a mud fight with the supermarket tabloid that exposed his extramarital affair, he is showing off the same drive that helped him turn a simple idea — selling books on the internet — into an all-purpose, $780 billion powerhouse.Mr. Bezos has risked significant personal embarrassment in taking on American Media Inc., the company that owns The National Enquirer, which last month devoted 11 pages to the tale of his extramarital affair. But with a personal fortune of more than $130 billion, he has the means to torment his tormentors. And as he showed Thursday with his surprise blog post, which accused the tabloid publisher of “extortion and blackmail,” Mr. Bezos is willing to get dirty in the pursuit of victory.He has attacked American Media right where it hurts — its shaky legal position — and the strategy is showing early signs of paying off.Federal prosecutors are reviewing Mr. Bezos’ claim that he has been extorted, according to two people briefed on the matter who were not authorized to discuss it publicly. And those prosecutors have planned a meeting with Mr. Bezos’ representatives, one of those people said.If American Media is found to have broken a law — any law — it would be in violation of a deal with federal prosecutors from the Southern District of New York. The agreement was struck in September after American Media admitted paying hush money during the 2016 presidential campaign to protect Donald J. Trump from allegations of an affair. Under the deal, the company would not be prosecuted for its Trump-related efforts as long as it stayed out of legal trouble for the next three years.Even as American Media fell into legal jeopardy last year, its board stood by the company’s chairman, David J. Pecker, and its top news executive, Dylan Howard. On Friday, however, the company announced that the board was starting an investigation of Mr. Bezos’ claims.“American Media believes fervently that it acted lawfully in the reporting of the story of Mr. Bezos,” the company said in a statement. “Nonetheless, in light of the nature of the allegations published by Mr. Bezos, the board has convened and determined that it should promptly and thoroughly investigate the claims. Upon completion of that investigation, the board will take whatever appropriate action is necessary.”[Read a primer on the players and plot points in the fight that has erupted between Mr. Bezos and American Media.]The Enquirer exposé detailed Mr. Bezos’ affair with Lauren Sanchez, a former host of the Fox show “So You Think You Can Dance.” It appeared a day after Mr. Bezos announced on Twitter that he and his wife of 25 years, the novelist MacKenzie Bezos, were getting divorced.Mr. Bezos wrote the blog post himself, according to one person close to him, who was not authorized to speak publicly, and several lawyers reviewed it before he hit publish. In the post, he said American Media had threatened to publish compromising photographs of him, including a “below the belt selfie,” if he did not publicly affirm that The Enquirer’s reporting on his affair with Ms. Sanchez was not motivated by political concerns.“If in my position I can’t stand up to this kind of extortion, how many people can?” he wrote.At 55, Mr. Bezos has become a prominent player in Hollywood and Washington. Thanks to Amazon’s entry into the entertainment business, he is no stranger to the red carpet and Golden Globes after-parties. And with a 27,000-square-foot mansion in the capital’s Kalorama neighborhood, which he bought for $23 million three years after he acquired The Post in 2013, he is a figure to be reckoned in political circles, albeit one who suffers name calling from the president’s Twitter account.Now, in his fight, Mr. Bezos has assembled an all-star crisis-management team of protectors and lawyers who have popped up alongside powerful political figures and celebrities over the last few decades.A key team member is the veteran Hollywood lawyer Martin Singer, who is technically representing Mr. Bezos’ longtime security chief, Gavin de Becker. Mr. Singer knows exactly how American Media works, and he has not always worked on the virtuous side of the street.ImageJennifer Salke, left, the Amazon Studios chief, with Mr. Bezos, the screenwriter Sam Esmail and the actress Emmy Rossum at a Hollywood party in January.CreditEmma Mcintyre/Getty ImagesThis is the lawyer who represented Bill Cosby in 2005, when The Enquirer was preparing an article about sexual assault allegations made against Mr. Cosby by a member of Temple University’s athletics staff, Andrea Constand. Mr. Singer persuaded the tabloid to sit on Ms. Constand’s story in return for an exclusive interview with the former prime-time star. And now he is Team Bezos.Also working on behalf of the Amazon founder is the law firm Boies Schiller Flexner. It has long represented Amazon in corporate matters, but now lawyers there are working for Mr. Bezos personally.One of them, Jonathan Sherman, previously represented American Media as it worked to squash negative stories about President Trump, according to a person familiar with the situation. Another working for Mr. Bezos, William Isaacson, represents Amazon in its corporate matters.David Boies, a partner at the firm, defended the producer Harvey Weinstein against accusations of sexual harassment and abuse. As part of his services, he helped orchestrate a smear campaign against the alleged victims of the mogul’s sexual misconduct and hired Black Cube, a private investigations firm staffed by former Israeli intelligence agents, to undercut accusers and the journalists looking into Mr. Weinstein.Another team member is Mr. de Becker, who has thwarted stalkers for stars like Olivia Newton-John and Cher and provided security for public figures visiting President Ronald Reagan and his family at the White House.Mr. de Becker is also the author of “The Gift of Fear,” a 1998 book that offers advice for dealing with threats (available on Amazon in paperback for $7.19). Concerning blackmail attempts specifically, he counseled confrontation, rather than appeasement — and it seems that Mr. Bezos followed the de Becker strategy with his blog post.“Victims often try to appease the extortionist, but these efforts just allow him to retain the underserved mantle of a decent person,” Mr. de Becker wrote. “I suggest that clients compel the extortionist to commit to his sleaziness, which puts him on the defensive.”In fighting back, Mr. Bezos is showing himself to be not unlike his no-holds-barred antagonist in the White House. And his media counteroffensive against the tabloid publisher has all the hallmarks of the opposition research campaigns that spice up election seasons.Before and after Mr. Bezos published his revealing post on the online platform Medium, various media outlets gave significant space to competing and sometimes contradictory claims about the possible motives behind American Media’s big story. All of those theories had little to do with the idea that salacious details about the private life of a famous multibillionaire would be of interest to checkout-stand impulse buyers.In an article late last month, The Daily Beast quoted Mr. de Becker as confirming that his team was looking into Michael Sanchez, the brother of Ms. Sanchez, as the potential leaker of private text messages The Enquirer published in its exposé. Mr. Sanchez denied it. As the piece noted, he is close with the Trump adviser and longtime provocateur Roger Stone, who has been indicted by the special counsel Robert S. Mueller III.Then there was Mr. Bezos’ suggestion in his Medium post that the coverage was somehow tied to American Media’s attempts to win business and possibly investment from Saudi Arabia. Mr. Bezos and his investigators had failed to offer any solid evidence for that theory — or, for that matter, any of the others.In October, American Media paid for and produced a magazine called The New Kingdom, which mysteriously appeared on newsstands ahead of a visit to the United States by the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman. The publication of this 100-page glossy, filled with laudatory text and splashy photos of the crown prince, coincided with American Media’s efforts to strike business deals in Saudi Arabia. The company has faced double-digit losses in its print circulation in recent years.Mr. Bezos has long played hardball in his business, and Amazon can wipe value off entire companies just by announcing new ventures in their industry. Only recently did Amazon start turning a consistent profit.Mr. Bezos’ aggressive stance plays out in the company’s actions in ways big and small. Last decade, a start-up called Diapers.com began gaining traction by offering free shipping to new parents. Amazon aggressively lowered its prices, undercutting the upstart.Amid the price war, it bought the company for $545 million in late 2010 and shut the site down in 2017. Amazon now captures 67 percent of all baby-related purchases online, according to the marketing analytics firm Jumpshot.Correction: Feb. 8, 2019Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated the surname of the crown prince of Saudi Arabia. He is Mohammed bin Salman, not Salmans.Ben Protess contributed reporting. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Is Said to Look at Bezos’ Extortion Claim. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageOpinionMaureen DowdDaddy Warbucks Goes to WarFeb. 9, 2019ImageOpinionKara SwisherJeff Bezos Isn’t Afraid of Total ExposureFeb. 8, 2019ImageWhy Jeff Bezos Went to Medium With His MessageFeb. 8, 2019ImageJeff Bezos Accuses National Enquirer of ‘Extortion and Blackmail’Feb. 7, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsDirt - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexCrosswords & GamesSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperCrosswords & Games|DirtAdvertisementSupported byDAILY CROSSWORD COLUMNDirtIn which Ali Gascoigne makes his American-style crossword debut and leaves us a clue: “Wordplay columnist starts to unravel today’s first-time appearance (5)”ImageThe designer Karl Lagerfeld whispering a secret to Imran Ahmed, the founder of Business of Fashion.CreditCreditErin Baiano for The New York TimesBy Deb AmlenFeb. 3, 2019MONDAY PUZZLE — Not that you asked, but when I am not busy solving crossword puzzles for work, I like to solve crossword puzzles for fun. I know, I probably need to get out more. The thing is, crossword puzzles are not all the same, especially when you leave the United States. In other parts of the world, the puzzles we call “cryptic crosswords” — in which each clue is also a puzzle — are just called “crosswords.” I like a palate cleanser after a week of American-style crossword puzzles, so I try to solve a cryptic crossword (I say “try,” because the clues are still somewhat opaque to me, especially the British ones). You should give them a try, too; they require learning a different set of rules, but they are incredibly satisfying. Start with the American-made ones by our constructors — they are considerably easier, and you won’t be hampered by cultural differences — and then make your way to a British one.Today we welcome Ali Gascoigne, who is making his New York Times Crossword debut. Mr. Gascoigne lives in London and, in his spare time, is a setter of cryptic crosswords (setters are what they call constructors across the pond). I find this debut fascinating; how often does a cryptic setter decide to leave his or her comfort zone and make an American-style crossword? I asked the editor, Will Shortz, about the history of non-American constructors in The New York Times Crossword, and he said, “American-style crosswords made by people living outside the United States are rare, but over the years, I've published a few in The Times. Not counting expats or cryptic puzzles, Mr. Gascoigne is the sixth non-American constructor we will have published. The others include Gareth Bain of South Africa, Mangesh Ghogre of India, Zack Kushner of Australia, Kurt Mueller of Germany and Roger Phillips of England.”Mr. Gascoigne was nice enough to sit down and answer some questions about his first time being published in a newspaper in the United States, which you can read below. In the meantime, are you wondering about the answer to the clue in our summary? Click on the clue below for the answer and an explanation.UPDATE: For some reason, our reveal toy is not working, so here’s the scoop on Mr. Gascoigne’s clue. The clue itself is “Wordplay columnist starts to unravel today’s first-time appearance (5),” and the answer is DEBUT. How do we know that? Because the definition is “first-time appearance,” which is a DEBUT. The wordplay is Deb + (u)-nravel + (t)-oday (the “u” and the “t” are the “starts to” or beginning of “unravel” and “today”).Tricky CluesMonday easy. You’ve got this. Just remember that “One who’s always looking for a lift?” is a SKIBUM, because we are supposed to be thinking about a ski lift, not a lift in a car.Today’s ThemeMr. Gascoigne offers us a set of four theme phrases that all contain the word INFO. For example, at 17A, the answer to the clue “Paranoiac’s headgear” is TINFOIL HAT.The fact that they are hidden makes them INSIDE INFO, as the revealer at 56A tells us.Overall, this is a lovely debut by Mr. Gascoigne, in the sense that he seems to have a good grip on what makes a Monday-level, American-style theme. His next step should be to fine tune his word list, as there are some entries that solvers in the United States might look at and deem “gluey,” like ULNA, I CAN, OTOE and OR NOT. It’s understandable, however, because cryptics generally use more common words and phrases as entries, while the wordplay is saved for the cluing. In addition, it’s tough for a beginning constructor with cultural differences to know what is considered lively in another country. I highly recommend Jeff Chen’s XWordInfo word list. Meet Ali GascoigneHi, Ali. Tell us a bit about yourself: Where do you live? Do you have a day job?I was born “up North” in Yorkshire but moved to London for work almost 20 years ago. By day, I’m a marketing strategist. This pays the bills, with crosswords providing occasional pocket money on the side.So you are a setter of crosswords where you live. Do you use a pseudonym, like many British setters, and how did you come up with it? In which newspapers have you been published?I construct cryptics in the U.K. using the pseudonym Gila (“Ali G” reversed). The first few puzzles I had published were advanced thematic puzzles in the Inquisitor and Enigmatic Variations series. I was then lucky enough to join the team of “regular” cryptic constructors at The Independent in 2016. I’m also about to make my debut in the Listener series in The (London) Times in March.I owe my love of crosswords entirely to my father, who sadly passed away at the start of January. His great sense of humo(u)r was influenced by a love of wordplay and language, and he taught me the ropes with the Telegraph cryptic puzzle during my teenage years. He was always immensely proud to tell people that I had become a constructor, just as I am to tell people that it’s all thanks to him that I did.How long have you been working on making an American-style crossword and what inspired you to try? Did you need much guidance from The New York Times puzzle editors before your puzzle was accepted? Until last year, my experience with U.S. crosswords was limited to occasional attempts at New York Times puzzles when on vacation, and only ever on a Monday or Tuesday. Anything beyond midweek was way too difficult. I only started solving U.S. puzzles in earnest in early 2018, when I subscribed to The New York Times Crossword app and I quickly got hooked. They’re varied, challenging, educational and, above all, fun — every bit as good as U.K. cryptics. I’ve since subscribed to lots more (such as American Values Club, Crossword Nation, the Inkubator), all of which are fantastic and have helped me learn and improve.Cryptic clues can provide inspiration for theme ideas and, as someone who is no stranger to spending far too much time creating grids themed on, among other things, Homer Simpson and links between Seinfeld and U.K. politics, it was inevitable that I’d eventually want to have a go myself.It was a challenge. I knew that a decent grid fill was vital and, as there was never a chance of me having the skills to produce the kind of open, stacked works of art you see in later week puzzles, focused on easier grid patterns and simple themes. Today’s puzzle was the second one sent from of an initial batch I worked on, but the “Yes!” was the first email I ever received from Will.The revealer is admittedly a very basic idea, but the team liked the liveliness of the theme entries and some of the bonus fill. U.K. puzzles by and large stick fairly rigidly to the dictionaries, so having access to entries like P. DIDDY and WRITE ME — and working with a much broader list of slang, neologisms and proper nouns — was good fun. For me, it was one of the principal draws of U.S. puzzles.As for the other puzzles in that batch, they were rejected, but all with helpful pointers. I’ve since sent another and have more ideas gestating — some simple, some possibly overly ambitious. I ideally don’t want this to be a case of one and done!Oh, and my Saturday average is now just under 30 minutes.Tell me about any differences you noticed between cluing a cryptic crossword and an American-style one. How easy or hard was it to learn the “rules” of cluing in the United States when you’ve been cluing cryptics for so long?Moving out of cryptic mode — and into this-is-primarily-for-a-U.S.-audience mode — was an interesting challenge. U.S. puzzle clues are mostly straight-up definitions. In cryptic cluing, the definition is usually the easy bit! [Cryptic clues have two parts: the definition and wordplay. These are put together to make a totally misleading clue that will keep you up until 3 a.m. trying to figure it out. — D.A.]I’m still relatively new to cryptic setting, and there are times when I’ve had to spend a long time chewing my pencil over one or two clues to finish a puzzle. I’d say cluing U.S. puzzles is much easier overall, but the emphasis is on a desire to making sure the clue set is varied, inclusive and factually correct. There were a few slightly cryptic clues in my original submission for this puzzle (e.g. referencing “noodle dishes” for BRAIN FOODS and cluing 58-Down as “24-Down, literally”), but these were edited. Perfectly understandable, as it’s a Monday puzzle. What I really want to do is get my hands on some later week grids so I can let rip a bit more.Constructor NotesIt’s a huge hono(u)r to be making my New York Times debut and to be breaking America, so to speak. To think that any people will be solving my puzzle makes me really quite giddy. It’s just as well it will go live online on the same day as the Super Bowl — the only Sunday night of the year when I’m actively trying to stay awake.Looking back at the puzzle eight months on, I’m mostly pleased with the grid as an early offering from someone with limited experience in solving or constructing U.S. puzzles. There was only one minor grid change from the original submission, and there’s hopefully not too much “glue.” Having gained more experience in the months since, and therefore casting a more critical eye post-publication, I think I’d prefer a neater lower stack to avoid AVILA (not a place I’d heard of) and N.R.A., which I’ve come to see can be understandably divisive.More amusingly, I’ve also spotted — and only now, I promise — that the first three down entries could be seen as a subliminal message for the editors!Many thanks to The New York Times crossword editorial team for having me and for neatening up my clues. I hope everyone enjoys the end result. And fingers crossed I’ll be back again.The Tipping PointAlmost finished solving but need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.Trying to get back to the puzzle page? Right here. Your thoughts?Deb Amlen is the crossword columnist. She has been writing the Wordplay column since 2011 and believes that everyone can learn to solve the Times crossword. Even the Saturdays.
@NYTimesWordplay AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsTrump Asks for Unity, but Presses Hard Line on Immigration - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexPoliticsSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperPolitics|Trump Asks for Unity, but Presses Hard Line on ImmigrationAdvertisementSupported byTrump Asks for Unity, but Presses Hard Line on ImmigrationVideoPresident Trump delivered his second State of the Union address on Tuesday night. Here are the highlights.CreditCreditDoug Mills/The New York TimesBy Peter BakerFeb. 5, 2019WASHINGTON — President Trump delivered a message of bipartisan unity on Tuesday night in his first address to Congress in the new era of divided government, but signaled that he would continue to wage war for the hard-line immigration policies that have polarized the capital and the nation.In a nationally televised speech that toggled between conciliation and confrontation, Mr. Trump presented himself as a leader who could work across party lines even as he pressed lawmakers to build a wall along the nation’s southwestern border that leaders of the newly empowered congressional Democrats have adamantly rejected.“We must reject the politics of revenge, resistance and retribution, and embrace the boundless potential of cooperation, compromise and the common good,” the president said. “Together, we can break decades of political stalemate. We can bridge old divisions, heal old wounds, build new coalitions, forge new solutions and unlock the extraordinary promise of America’s future.”Any hopes for a newfound spirit of cooperation, however, seemed elusive as the president and Democrats spent the hours before, during and after the address exchanging partisan political fire, making clear that ritualistic calls for across-the-aisle collaboration were unlikely to transform an environment that has turned increasingly toxic.Republicans jumped to their feet at the president’s calls to curb immigration, limit late-term abortions and ensure that the United States does not turn to socialism, even chanting “U-S-A, U-S-A” a couple of times as if at a Trump campaign rally. “That sounds so good,” he exulted.Speaker Nancy Pelosi, sitting behind Mr. Trump for the first time, and other Democrats largely remained in their seats without applauding and expressed only tepid enthusiasm even for his mention of goals intended to appeal to them, like infrastructure and paid parental leave. Ms. Pelosi maintained a polite, even amused smile on her face for much of the speech.But the evening was filled with political theater as the president introduced World War II veterans, Holocaust survivors, the Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin, a 10-year-old cancer survivor, a police officer shot seven times at last fall’s synagogue massacre in Pittsburgh and the teary-eyed relatives of a couple killed by an illegal immigrant, all sitting with the first lady, Melania Trump.The change in the power structure in a Capitol long dominated by men was on display as Ms. Pelosi and scores of House Democratic women wore white, the color of the suffrage movement, reflecting the fact that 131 women were sworn into the new Congress, the most in American history.When Mr. Trump noted this breakthrough, the women leapt to their feet, cheering, dancing and high-fiving each other. “That’s really great,” he said. “Congratulations.”He made no direct mention of the issues that may yet come to dominate the year, such as the Russia investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, or the parallel inquiries that House Democrats intend to conduct into his campaign’s ties with Russia and efforts to impede investigations.Instead, he alluded to them only in passing, but pointedly. “An economic miracle is taking place in the United States,” he said, “and the only thing that can stop it are foolish wars, politics or ridiculous partisan investigations.”But Mr. Trump indicated no retreat from his almost singular pursuit of a border wall, directly taking on Ms. Pelosi, who has called it “immoral.” He devoted 15 minutes of the hour-and-22-minute speech to immigration with no concession to Democratic priorities like a path to citizenship for immigrants brought into the country illegally as children.“This is a moral issue,” Mr. Trump said as Ms. Pelosi sat unmoved behind him. “No issue better illustrates the divide between America’s working class and America’s political class than illegal immigration,” he added. “Wealthy politicians and donors push for open borders while living their lives behind walls and gates and guards.”In the official Democratic response, Stacey Abrams, who lost a close race for governor of Georgia in November, scorned the idea of unity from a president who has practiced the politics of division. “We know bipartisanship could craft a 21st-century immigration plan,” she said, “but this administration chooses to cage children and tear families apart.”Ms. Abrams, who is African-American, challenged Mr. Trump’s history of racial provocation, saying, “We must hold everyone from the highest offices to our families accountable for racist words and deeds and call racism what it is — wrong.”The president’s speech, built on a theme of “choosing greatness,” came at a pivotal moment halfway through the president’s term as he seeks to regain momentum after the midterm election defeat that handed control of the House to Democrats and after his failed effort to use a partial government shutdown to extract money for the wall.Stung by his retreat on the government shutdown, Mr. Trump has hardly been in the mood for collaboration with the other party. As he and his team drafted his address in recent days, he has groused about the text, complaining that it was too gentle on Democrats, according to people briefed on the matter.Transcript: Trump’s State of the Union, AnnotatedNew York Times reporters analyzed the 45th president’s second State of the Union Speech on Tuesday.The president insisted on sharpening some of the lines in the speech and rebuffed aides, who urged him to congratulate Ms. Pelosi on her ascension to the speakership.During an off-the-record lunch for television anchors on Tuesday before the speech, Mr. Trump offered scathing assessments of a number of leading Democrats, including some lining up to run against him next year.He dismissed former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. as “dumb,” called Senator Chuck Schumer of New York a “nasty son of a bitch” and mocked Gov. Ralph Northam of Virginia, who he said “choked like a dog” at a news conference where Mr. Northam tried to explain a racist yearbook photograph, according to multiple people in the room.Democrats did not wait for the address to pan it. “It seems every year the president wakes up and discovers the desire for unity on the morning of the State of the Union, then the president spends the other 364 days of the year dividing us, and sowing a state of disunion,” Mr. Schumer said on the Senate floor. He added, “The blatant hypocrisy of this president calling for unity is that he is one of the chief reasons Americans feel so divided now.”Mr. Trump fired back at Mr. Schumer via Twitter. “I see Schumer is already criticizing my State of the Union speech, even though he hasn’t seen it yet,” the president wrote. “He’s just upset that he didn’t win the Senate, after spending a fortune, like he thought he would. Too bad we weren’t given more credit for the Senate win by the media!”Mr. Trump arrived at this point in his presidency with the approval of just 37 percent of the public, according to Gallup. In the past four decades, the only times a president headed into a State of the Union address with as little or less support were in 1983 when Ronald Reagan was struggling with a painful recession and in 2007 and 2008 when George W. Bush was trying to turn around the Iraq war.Mr. Trump is the only president in the history of Gallup polling to have never drawn the support of a majority of the public at any point in his first two years in office. But while he is the fourth president in a row to lose at least one house of Congress during a midterm election, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama both bounced back to win re-election, and Mr. Trump has privately expressed confidence that he will, too.ImageListen to ‘The Daily’: What Past State of the Union Speeches Tell Us About the FutureLike President Trump, the last three presidents all lost at least one house of Congress at a midterm election. Their subsequent speeches offered a blueprint for what came next.transcriptBack to The Dailybars0:00/26:34-26:34transcriptListen to ‘The Daily’: What Past State of the Union Speeches Tell Us About the FutureHosted by Michael Barbaro, produced by Clare Toeniskoetter, Alexandra Leigh Young and Annie Brown, and edited by Lisa TobinLike President Trump, the last three presidents all lost at least one house of Congress at a midterm election. Their subsequent speeches offered a blueprint for what came next.michael barbaroFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today: In his first State of the Union address since losing control of Congress, the president repeatedly spoke of bipartisan unity. But a history of these speeches suggests that it’s everything else he said that will best predict how he actually governs. It’s Wednesday, February 6. Mark?mark landlerYeah, Michael?michael barbaroHey.mark landlerHow are you?michael barbaroGood. Happy State of the Union.mark landlerSame to you.michael barbaroI really don’t like this language people use, “S.O.T.U.”mark landlerYeah, it’s really awful.michael barbaroAwful. So let’s not do that.mark landlerIt’s kind of a dismal evening anyway, and calling it “S.O.T.U.” just sort of deepens the gloom that hangs over the whole thing.michael barbaroAnd yeah, why is it so gloomy?mark landlerI don’t know. I mean, you wouldn’t believe it— there were, like, 50 people in the meeting today for S.O.T.U. planning.michael barbaroWhat did we say about that word?mark landlerO.K.michael barbaroO.K., everybody good? Mark, what’s the significance of this particular State of the Union in your mind?mark landlerFor President Trump, this is the first State of the Union address he’s delivered since his party was swept out of power in the midterm election last November. And so it’s the first time he’s facing a divided Congress. And the president is really forced to conduct a very public reset of his presidency to take account of a divided Washington. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president bill clinton)Mr. President, Mr. Speaker. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerIt’s not a unique situation, by any stretch. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): Madame Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress, distinguished guests and fellow citizens.archived recording (president barack obama)Members of Congress, distinguished guests and fellow Americans. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAll three of Mr. Trump’s immediate predecessors faced the same situation. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president bill clinton)Again, we are here in the sanctuary of democracy. ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): The rite of custom brings us together at a defining hour. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerWith State of the Union addresses they gave after their party suffered defeats in midterm elections. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): When decisions are hard and courage is needed.archived recording (president barack obama)I believe we can, and I believe we must. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerEach of them approached the situation in different ways. And in each case, it provided a sort of a telling glimpse, a blueprint for how they were going to behave over the coming two years of their presidencies. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): And this is the business before us tonight.archived recording (president barack obama)That’s what the people who sent us here expect of us.archived recording (president bill clinton)Well, my fellow Americans, that’s my agenda for America’s future. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroSo take us through the examples of these last three presidents who have given these speeches after they lost a midterm election. How have they approached the speech?mark landlerWell, let’s start with Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton gave his State of the Union address in January 1995 — [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingDemocrats lost the House, they lost the Senate. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerThree months after his party suffered a devastating defeat in the midterm elections. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingThe Democratic chairman David Wilhelm said, simply, we got our butts kicked. Not one incumbent Republican lost. The anti-Clinton tide was fueled largely by frustration. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerTime Magazine put him on the cover under the headline “The Incredible Shrinking President.” Journalists even asked him whether he was still relevant anymore. And so this relatively young, untested president was dealt a very serious blow. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingMr. Speaker, the president of the United States. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd he really came into his State of the Union address acknowledging that fact. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president bill clinton)If we agree on nothing else tonight, we must agree that the American people certainly voted for change in 1992 and in 1994. As I look out at you, I know how some of you must have felt in 1992. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerBill Clinton took a very contrite tone. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president bill clinton)In this effort, I am trying to say that I have made my mistakes. And I have learned, again, the importance of humility in all human endeavor. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerSo this was a president who admitted that he had screwed up and he pledged to learn from this experience. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president bill clinton)I think we all agree that we have to change the way the government works. Let’s make it smaller, less costly and smarter— leaner and not meaner. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd even more than that, he pledged to take seriously the message that this incoming Republican majority brought with it. He acknowledged that, to some extent, the era of big government was over. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president bill clinton)And we’re working on getting rid of unnecessary regulations and making them more sensible. The programs and regulations that have outlived their usefulness should go. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerBill Kristol, a conservative commentator, commented after this speech was given that it was the most conservative State of the Union address any Democratic president had ever delivered. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president bill clinton)This is a very, very great country. And our best days are still to come. Thank you, and God bless you all. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroSo how much did Clinton’s message at this State of the Union— this conciliatory tone, these promises of bipartisanship and an acknowledgment of this conservative agenda— how much did it predict how he was going to govern for the next two years?mark landlerSo, in fact, Bill Clinton did adjust. He did govern more as a centrist. He did pursue policies where he tried to find some common ground. And in the end, by moving toward his opponents, he wound up being very successful. And two years later, he was re-elected by a comfortable margin over his Republican opponent, Bob Dole. And Newt Gingrich, his antagonist— the man who sat behind him that night at the speech— wound up being the wounded figure, because he had gone to war with President Clinton over a government shutdown, and he ended up shouldering the blame, not Clinton. In other words, the State of the Union actually showed that this was a president who was learning on the job, who was willing to adjust course, and came out of it victorious. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingWashington turned upside down. The Democrats in, Rumsfeld out— tonight on “Washington Week.” ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): If you look at race by race, it was close. The cumulative effect, however, was not too close. It was a thumping. Even the president could not find a silver lining this time. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerTwelve years later, Bill Clinton’s successor, George W. Bush, found himself in a very similar situation. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingRepublicans licked their wounds. Don Rumsfeld lost his job. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerThe Iraq War has gone very badly. He’s been widely condemned for his handling of Hurricane Katrina. And in the midterm elections of 2006, the voters deliver a brutal message. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingI think you could say the driving force was that old refrain, “I’m mad as hell, and I’m not going to take it anymore.” And that’s what we heard. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerThey send Congress back into the control of the Democrats. And President Bush turns up for his State of the Union address. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (speaker nancy pelosi)The president of the United States. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerFacing House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): And tonight, I have the high privilege and distinct honor of my own as the first president to begin the State of the Union message with these words: Madame Speaker. [END PLAYBACK] He’s extremely gracious to her. He congratulates her. He refers to her father, who was a Democratic lawmaker from Baltimore, and the pride he would have felt if he had seen his daughter presiding in the chamber that night. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): But nothing could compare with the sight of his only daughter, Nancy. [END PLAYBACK] And then he delivers a speech. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): Some in this chamber are new to the House and the Senate, and I congratulate the Democrat majority. [END PLAYBACK] Where he takes account of the bitterness that Iraq has caused and the opposition that it has stirred up. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): With the distance of time, we find ourselves debating the causes of conflict and the course we have followed. [END PLAYBACK] Not just among Democrats, but among members of his own party. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): I’ve spoken with many of you in person. I respect you and the arguments you’ve made. We went into this largely united in our assumptions and in our convictions. And whatever you voted for, you did not vote for failure. [END PLAYBACK] And he, in effect, pleads for more time. He says that in this difficult situation, he and his military advisers have decided on a troop surge. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): So we’re deploying reinforcements of more than 20,000 additional soldiers and Marines to Iraq. [END PLAYBACK] And he basically asks for time to get this war right. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): Our country is pursuing a new strategy in Iraq, and I ask you to give it a chance to work. And I ask you to support our troops in the field and those on their way. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroSo President Bush uses this speech to acknowledge the unhappiness in the country. But unlike Clinton after the midterms, he doesn’t change his approach. In fact, he leans into it and doubles down on it when it comes to the war in Iraq. [AUDIO PLAYBACK] ARCHIVED RECORDING (PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH): Our cause in the world is right. And tonight, that cause goes on. God bless. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd he also sticks to it afterward. So this speech is a very accurate blueprint for what the rest of the Bush presidency looks like. He does send the troops, they wind up having more success than many of the critics expected, and this becomes the way the United States winds down the war in Iraq. He really lays out the end game in Iraq in this State of the Union address. It actually proves to be a very, very accurate predictor of how things play out. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingRight now, we’re looking at a live picture of the U.S. Capitol, where the Republicans will seize control of the House of Representatives. Picking up more than 60 seats now. Ohio’s John Boehner now stands to become the next speaker, replacing Nancy Pelosi. He already got a call. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd then came President Obama, who spoke before Congress in January 2011, three months after his party lost control of Congress. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingThe American people have sent an unmistakable message to him tonight, and that message is— change course. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd left this young president very much on his back foot. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president barack obama)Tonight, I want to begin by congratulating the men and women of the 112th Congress as well as your new speaker, John Boehner. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroAnd how did Obama’s State of the Union confront that?mark landlerWell, Obama responds to this setback, to this defeat, not by being contrite or acknowledging error. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president barack obama)For the challenges we face are bigger than party, bigger than politics. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerBut by, in effect, pushing past it. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president barack obama)At stake right now is not who wins the next election— after all, we just had an election. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerBy brushing it aside, by saying there are bigger things that we need to focus on than petty politics. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president barack obama)At stake is whether new jobs and industries take root in this country or somewhere else. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroEssentially, by ignoring it.mark landlerIndeed. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president barack obama)The future is ours to win. But to get there, we can’t just stand still. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerSo it was a very soaring message that was in keeping with the way President Obama ran for office, but one that didn’t necessarily acknowledge the defeat that his party had just suffered.michael barbaroSo does the way that Obama responds to this division in this speech— by kind of ignoring it, by not fully acknowledging the new political terrain he has to confront— does this forecast how he ends up working with Congress for the next two years?mark landlerI think it does quite accurately. Because if you look at what happens in the years after this, President Obama never really does form a good working relationship. He never really does roll up his sleeves and attempt to find much common ground with Republicans in Congress. And so, to some extent, these grand ideas remain just that— grand ideas, because he wasn’t able to work with Republicans to translate them into more of a tangible reality.michael barbaroSo in that sense, the speech was a very honest and accurate predictor.mark landlerExactly. Indeed.michael barbaroO.K. So it is 7:52, Mark— a little over an hour before President Trump gives his State of the Union. Given the history you’ve just described, what do you expect his message to be now that he has divided government?mark landlerWe don’t know exactly what he’s going to say, but we do know that whatever their differences, all three of his predecessors issued a call for unity. Unity is the one theme that we can almost certainly expect to hear in virtually any State of the Union address. But what’s really interesting is less that than what’s between the lines, what’s the subtext or the nuance in the State of the Union address. That’s where you can really see what the president plans to do, how he plans to govern, what blueprint or what predicate he’s putting in place. So what’s going to be interesting in President Trump’s address is not a call for unity. It’s almost certainly going to be there. It’s the other things that are in the speech that are going to really tell you what we can expect.michael barbaroSo, Mark, thank you for now. We will talk to you after Trump’s State of the Union in, I guess, an hour or two.mark landlerLook forward to it.michael barbaro So, Mark, what did President Trump do tonight?mark landlerWell, when President Trump took the rostrum in the House chamber tonight — [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Thank you very much. Madame Speaker. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerHe uttered the phrase “Madame Speaker” in deference to Nancy Pelosi, but he avoided giving her any further congratulations on taking up her position. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)We meet tonight at a moment of unlimited potential. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerHe did, nevertheless, start off with— [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)As we begin a new Congress, I stand here ready to work with you to achieve historic breakthroughs for all Americans. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerA pretty standard call for bipartisanship and for unity. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Hoping that we will govern not as two parties, but as one nation. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerHe said at one point— [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Victory is not winning for our party— [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerVictory is not winning for our party, victory is winning for our country. From there, he sort of segued into the economic achievements of his administration. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)In just over two years since the election, we have launched an unprecedented economic boom. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerBut at that point, he took a distinct turn in tone. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)An economic miracle is taking place in the United States, and the only thing that can stop it— [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerHe basically said at this point— [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Are foolish wars, politics or ridiculous partisan investigations. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerThere can’t be any cooperation on legislation if there’s going to be what he called ridiculous partisan investigations of his presidency. This was a reference not only to potential future investigations by Congress, but also the Mueller investigation. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)If there is going to be peace and legislation, there cannot be war and investigation. It just doesn’t work that way. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd he actually put a fairly menacing tone on it. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Now is the time for bipartisan action. Believe it or not, we have already proven that that’s possible. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerFrom there, he turns to a more bipartisan issue— criminal justice reform. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Criminal justice reform— they said it couldn’t be done. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerBut almost immediately— [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Now Republicans and Democrats must join forces again to confront an urgent national crisis. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerHe then segues into immigration, talks about the virtues and importance of building a wall. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Wealthy politicians and donors push for open borders. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd accuses the political elite of being divided from ordinary, working-class Americans. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)While living their lives behind walls and gates and guards. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerSo the language here is extremely uncompromising. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Simply put— walls work, and walls save lives. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd this toggling continues throughout the speech. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Two weeks ago, the United States officially recognized the legitimate government of Venezuela. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAt one point, he’s talking about the global coalition to force out a tyrant, an autocrat in Venezuela. And yet in his next breath— [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Here in the United States, we are alarmed by the new calls to adopt socialism in our country. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerHe’s likening this new class of Democrats in Congress to socialists. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)America was founded on liberty and independence. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd saying, America will never be a socialist country. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)We are born free, and we will stay free. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroBut it sounds like you think that the conciliatory language is just the obligatory language of the State of the Union, and it’s the harder-edged stuff that we should be listening to and thinking about in relation to past State of the Unions that you outlined before.mark landlerI do. I think that if you look at the things the president talks about that are more conciliatory, they tend to be on the level of symbolism. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)In recent years, we have made remarkable progress in the fight against H.I.V. and AIDS. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerA campaign to fight AIDS with no dollar sign attached to it. A campaign to fight cancer in children with no specifics attached to it. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)My budget will ask Congress for $500 million over the next 10 years to fund this critical, life-saving research. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerWhile the areas where he’s hard-edged are really the ones that matter to the future direction of governance and of his relationship with Congress. Whether he resolves this issue over funding the wall and, more broadly, whether he and the Democrats ever come to terms on immigration is really a core issue of how the rest of the Trump presidency will play out. That, much more than these conciliatory stories, these nice images, are really what matter in this speech. And I think the speechwriters were very careful to lard this speech with this kind of uplifting material. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)In 2019, we also celebrate 50 years since brave young pilots flew a quarter of a million miles through space to plant the American flag on the face of the moon. [END PLAYBACK] To make it more attractive to a broad audience while also speaking to the president’s political base. But make no mistake— this speech was targeted to the political base. It was meant to mollify that base. And I think it’s important that we not lose sight of that reality.michael barbaroSo where does this speech fit into the history of State of the Unions that have come after the dawn of divided government?mark landlerWell, I think what’s most significant is that there is really no acknowledgment in this speech of the changed circumstances. There’s no acknowledgment here that President Trump faces a new political reality, that he has to do business with the Democrats if he wants to get any significant legislation passed. This is the speech given by a president who is behaving very much like he did the week he was inaugurated, when he had a unified Congress under his control.michael barbaroDoes that make this, then, an Obama-like State of the Union?mark landlerI think the difference with President Obama is that, while he did not suggest that the defeat in the midterms was really going to change how he approached governing, he did at least acknowledge the fact that he had suffered an electoral setback in the midterms. In Mr. Trump’s case, he didn’t acknowledge the defeat he suffered in the midterm elections except in a highly indirect way. And it was actually one of the most remarkable moments of the evening. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)No one has benefited more from our thriving economy than women. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerPresident Trump was talking about the increasing numbers of women in the workplace, including in Congress. And spontaneously, this group of young, female Democratic lawmakers rose in unison and began chanting “U.S.A” and cheering and clapping. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Very good. And congratulations, that’s great. [END PLAYBACK]mark landlerAnd the president broke into a smile and appeared, in a funny way, to be taking credit for their presence in the House— which, of course, is deeply ironic, because the reason they’re in the House is because they were elected largely as a repudiation of him. So I think if you’re looking for any signs of a newly pragmatic president or a president who will take heed of some of the concerns of the opposing party, I don’t think we saw any of that in the speech tonight. And I would not expect to see any of that in his governing style over the next couple of years.michael barbaroWell, Mark, it is almost 1:00 a.m. We are really grateful to you, thank you so much.mark landlerThank you, Michael. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recording (president donald trump)Thank you. God bless you. And God bless America. Thank you very much. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroHere’s what else you need to know today. On Tuesday, in the latest sign of progress toward a peace deal, leaders of the Taliban met with former high-ranking leaders of the Afghan government, including its former president in Moscow. The session excluded the leaders of Afghanistan’s current government, who the Taliban views as a US puppet but was still the most significant contact between the Taliban and Afghan leaders since the US drove the Taliban from power in 2001. In a surprising development during the negotiations, the Taliban said it now respected women’s rights, including the right to education and work, despite having banned women from public life when the group was in power. And. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingFor example, you wrote in the 1990s that climate change is nothing more than a major environmental boogey man and the greenhouse effort is a controversial theory pushed by environmental groups. You still stand by those assertions? [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroDuring a heated confirmation hearing on Tuesday, senators from both parties questioned the past writings of Naomi Rowe, president Trump’s nominee to replace Brett Kavanaugh on the powerful federal appeals court in Washington. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingSenator Leahy, those are statements from college, as you said, a few decades old when I think some of these issues were more hotly debated. And, no, I mean, I think the science has become much more conclusive over time. Conclusive in what way? Well, I think they’re— my understanding is that there’s an overwhelming scientific consensus that there is climate change. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroSenators repeatedly asked Rowe to explain a series of provocative columns she wrote as a college student expressing skepticism about global warming and calling equality between women and men a dangerous concept. [AUDIO PLAYBACK]archived recordingA dangerous feminist ideal is that women are created equal? Senator, I very much regret that statement and I’ve always believed strongly in the equality of women and men and for equal rights and opportunities for women. I’m honestly not sure why I wrote that in college. [END PLAYBACK]michael barbaroThat’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.After presidents suffer setbacks in midterms, they often reach out to the victorious opposition with words of conciliation, however artificial or short-lived they may be. In Mr. Trump’s case, he opened this period of partisan power sharing with a relentless confrontation over his proposed border wall, resulting in a record-breaking 35-day partial government shutdown.That impasse nearly cost Mr. Trump his opportunity to deliver his State of the Union address, as Ms. Pelosi refused to let him come to the House chamber as long as federal agencies were closed and workers unpaid. Mr. Trump backed down and accepted a measure reopening the government for three weeks, but negotiations in the interim have made no more progress toward winning money for his wall — and the government could close again on Feb. 15.Given that, Mr. Trump’s calls for unity were almost surely destined to fall on deaf ears. Even Republicans have publicly rebuked him lately for his plans to withdraw troops from Syria and Afghanistan, and party leaders have pressed him not to declare a national emergency bypassing Congress to build the wall.Among those invited by the president to join the first lady during the speech was Joshua Trump, a sixth-grade student from Wilmington, Del., who “has been bullied in school due to his last name,” according to the White House.Democrats were making points with their guests, as well. Among those they invited were air traffic controllers who went unpaid during the government shutdown, illegal immigrants who worked at Mr. Trump’s properties and transgender soldiers who will be banned under the president’s new policy.In addition to Ms. Abrams, other Democrats sought to get in on the action. Senator Kamala Harris of California, who is running for president, delivered her own response shortly before the speech, while Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who may also run, delivered his afterward.In his address, Mr. Trump assailed Democrats like Mr. Northam for comments in support of easing restrictions on late-term abortions and called for federal legislation cracking down on such procedures, a nod to Mr. Trump’s conservative base. He made no mention of the racist medical school yearbook picture that has threatened Mr. Northam’s political career, after aides cautioned him about raising that issue.Mr. Trump also sought to frame the opposition Democrats as too extreme, suggesting that the country was in danger of a socialist takeover. “Here in the United States, we are alarmed by new calls to adopt socialism in our country,” he said, as Republican lawmakers booed. “We are born free and we will stay free. Tonight we renew our resolve that America will never be a socialist country.”The president highlighted what he sees as the accomplishments of his first two years in office, including a growing economy, rising energy production, increased military spending, deregulation and tax cuts. He pressed Congress to approve his new trade pact with Canada and Mexico updating the North American Free Trade Agreement.Mr. Trump did not outline the traditional laundry list of new initiatives, the way other presidents have, but he did plan to make a national commitment to end transmission of the virus that causes AIDS, with a goal of stopping its spread in the United States by 2030. He repeated past calls for bipartisan measures to rebuild “America’s crumbling infrastructure,” curb the cost of prescription drugs and approve paid parental leave.The president also talked about his goal of bringing an end to the “endless wars” in places like Syria and Afghanistan, the threat he sees from Iran and his bid to force President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela to step down. He announced that he would meet for the second time with North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, in Vietnam on Feb. 27-28 to seek his nuclear disarmament.Mr. Trump ended his address with an uncharacteristic effort at poetry, an ode to America and its common purpose. “I am asking you to choose greatness,” he said. “No matter the trials we face, no matter the challenges to come, we must go forward together.”Michael Grynbaum contributed reporting from New York, and Maggie Haberman and Emily Baumgaertner from Washington. Follow Peter Baker on Twitter: @peterbakernyt.A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Asking For Unity, Trump Renews Bid For Border Wall. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | SubscribeRelated CoverageInternet Sees a Clapback in Nancy Pelosi’s Applause of TrumpFeb. 6, 2019ImageBefore the State of the Union, a Day of Anticipation and PreparationFeb. 5, 2019What Is Late-Term Abortion? Trump Got It WrongFeb. 6, 2019ImageAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptionsDealBook Briefing: Tech No Longer Carries the Stock Market - The New York Times
SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexSubscribeLog InLog InToday’s PaperDealBook|DealBook Briefing: Tech No Longer Carries the Stock MarketAdvertisementDealBook Business and PolicySupported byDealBook Briefing: Tech No Longer Carries the Stock MarketImageAn Apple store in Hong Kong.CreditCreditJerome Favre/EPA, via ShutterstockFeb. 4, 2019Good Monday morning. Want this by email? Sign up here.A ‘chip dip’ threatens Big Tech’s cloutFrom Apple to Nvidia, tech companies say that business is slowing. What’s happening?Big tech companies are reporting lackluster results. Weak Chinese consumer demand blew a $9 billion hole in Apple’s latest quarterly sales. Nvidia warned last month that its revenue would come in 20 percent below expectations. Intel’s January financials didn’t meet forecasts. And Samsung’s sales plunged 10 percent in the fourth quarter.Behind the trend: semiconductors. “China, smartphones, Bitcoin and cloud computing have been among the major drivers of the long tech boom, which in turn has powered the global economy for the last decade. The ingredient common to all of these sectors is computer chips, which form the brains of devices and whose ubiquity means they provide early signals about changes in supply and demand,” write David Streitfeld and Don Clark of the NYT. With chip manufacturers predicting slumping sales for 2019, tech more generally could be in line for a slowdown.Sound familiar? “The notion that a chip dip could lead to a general downturn evokes memories of 2000, when one day tech had an unlimited future and the next it was crashing in what became known as the dot-com bust,” write Mr. Streitfeld and Mr. Clark.And the industry no longer carries the stock market. For years, stock market performance have been tied to the fortunes of the largest tech companies: Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Microsoft and Netflix. As the S&P 500 pushed to a record high last summer, rises in those six companies’ share prices accounted for half of its gain. But when the index rallied nearly 8 percent in January, Stephen Grocer writes, their stocks accounted for just 17 percent of the rise.Lloyd Blankfein may pay for Goldman’s links to 1MDBThe former Goldman Sachs C.E.O. — as well as his successor, David Solomon, and other top executives — may have to give back some compensation from 2018, depending on the findings of an investigation into the firm’s work with the scandal-ridden Malaysian investment fund 1MDB.The announcement, made in a regulatory filing on Friday, shows how seriously Goldman is treating any role it may have had in fraud committed at 1MDB. Prosecutors in the U.S. and Malaysia are leading criminal investigations into 1MDB, and a former top deal maker at the firm has pleaded guilty to bribery, conspiracy and money laundering charges. Goldman says it’s cooperating with authorities.The WSJ calculates that Mr. Blankfein, who stepped down as chief executive of Goldman last year, might lose millions. And though Mr. Solomon wasn’t a top-ranking Goldman executive at the time, he could see some of his $23 million pay for last year clawed back as well. (Gary Cohn, who was Goldman’s No. 2 during the 1MDB work and received a lump payout when he left the firm in 2017, wouldn’t be affected.)In lighter Goldman news: Mr. Solomon, whose side hustle is DJing as DJ D-Sol, has released his second single, “Feel Alive.”Deutsche Bank refused Trump a loan in 2016For two decades, Deutsche Bank was the only major lender to give Donald Trump money, helping him finance his real estate operations. But when he sought a loan in early 2016 to help pay for a Scottish golf course — all while running for president — the German lender said no.More from David Enrich, Jesse Drucker and Ben Protess of the NYT:Senior officials at the bank, including its future chief executive, believed that Mr. Trump’s divisive candidacy made such a loan too risky, the people said. Among their concerns was that if Mr. Trump won the election and then defaulted, Deutsche Bank would have to choose between not collecting on the debt or seizing the assets of the president of the United States.What’s next: Expect House Democrats to include this in their investigation of Mr. Trump’s finances.More Deutsche Bank news: The lender reportedly scrambled to rid itself of a $600 million loan made to VTB, a Russian state-owned bank, in late 2016 as the German bank sought to reduce its exposure to Russian entities.How an S.U.V. became a Brexit warning signThe automaker Nissan confirmed yesterday that it had abandoned plans to build its new X-Trail sport utility vehicle in Britain and said that the car would be produced solely in Japan. It’s a blow for the British economy, and a clear signal that uncertainty over Britain’s withdrawal from the E.U. is weighing on corporate minds.A clear culprit. “The continued uncertainty around the U.K.’s future relationship with the E.U. is not helping companies like ours to plan for the future,” Nissan’s Europe chairman, Gianluca de Ficchy, said in a statement. Greg Clark, Britain’s business secretary, told the FT that it was “a warning sign” about how much damage could be caused by a no-deal Brexit.Nissan is not alone. British C.F.O.s say that Brexit is currently the largest threat to their businesses. Some 78 percent of those surveyed said that the business environment in the nation would deteriorate if Britain left the E.U.What now? Prime Minister Theresa May is set to return to Brussels in the coming days in an attempt to redraft her Brexit deal. In the meantime, Bloomberg reports that she “will launch a new government working group intended to unite the feuding pro- and anti-Brexit factions” in her party.ImageA Shell processing plant near Wink, Tex.CreditTamir Kalifa for The New York TimesThe oil field that made American oil greatThe U.S. is now the top oil producer in the world, able to sway petroleum prices and breezily sanction Iran and Venezuela. The reason, as Cliff Krauss of the NYT notes: the Permian Basin, the heart of America’s shale industry.How big is it? It covers the same area as South Dakota, and produces four million barrels of oil a day — making it a bigger generator of oil than any member of OPEC other than Iraq and Saudi Arabia.What makes it special? It’s huge and rich in oil rather than in less-valuable natural gas. And it’s close to refineries on the Gulf of Mexico.What could go wrong? Oil companies there might pump too much, drawing ire from OPEC. As Scott Sheffield, the chairman of Pioneer Natural Resources, told the NYT: “You could have another price war.” And U.S. sanctions on Venezuelan crude could hurt American refineries, which can’t rely solely on the Permian.Hungry for ‘executive time’ in your calendar? Study Trump’s schedule and weepAxios has published almost three months of President Trump’s schedules after they were leaked, reportedly by somebody in the White House. Some highlights:• “Trump has spent around 60 percent of his scheduled time over the past three months in unstructured ‘Executive Time.’ ”• “He spends his mornings in the residence, watching TV, reading the papers, and responding to what he sees and reads by phoning aides, members of Congress, friends, administration officials and informal advisers,” six people with direct knowledge of his schedule told Axios.• “Trump’s first meeting of the day — usually around 11 or 11:30 a.m. — is often an intelligence briefing or a 30-minute meeting with the chief of staff.”• “The president sometimes has meetings during Executive Time that he doesn’t want most West Wing staff to know about for fear of leaks. And his mornings sometimes include calls with heads of state, political meetings and meetings with counsel in the residence, which aren’t captured on these schedules.”Bonus: Axios also compared the schedules with those of Mr. Trump’s predecessors. He appears to share most in common with Bill Clinton’s early days in office.ImageThe Dude and Carrie Bradshaw in Stella Artois’s Super Bowl ad.CreditAgence France-Presse — Getty Images2019’s Super Bowl ads: nostalgia, wokeness and depressing techO.K., so the game itself may have been a slog to watch, and the halftime show was forgettable. But for those of you who came for the ads, here are the themes that dominated — to the tune of $5.2 million per 30 seconds of airtime.The ’90s: Stella Artois featured Carrie Bradshaw from “Sex and the City” and the Dude from “The Big Lebowski.” Doritos put the Backstreet Boys front and center.Social consciousness: The dating app Bumble hired Serena Williams to urge women to “make the first move” in all parts of their lives. And Budweiser touted renewable energy in an ad featuring a cute dog.The downsides of tech: Olay’s spot showed the actress Sarah Michelle Gellar struggling to save herself from a home intruder when her phone’s facial-recognition software fails. An ad for Pringles featured a smart speaker bemoaning its existence. And TurboTax built an ad around a robot boy craving a late-night snack.Revolving doorApple reportedly removed Bill Stasior as the head of its Siri virtual assistant unit, though he remains at the company.Gianni Infantino is poised to win a second term as president of FIFA, soccer’s global governing body.SoftBank of Japan hired Sarah Lubman, most recently a partner at the Brunswick Group, as a partner in corporate communications.The speed readDeals• Spotify is said to be in talks to buy the podcasting company Gimlet Media. (NYT)• The drug companies Bristol-Myers Squibb and Celgene will pay about $304 million in fees to their investment banks for arranging their $74 billion union. (FT)• KKR is said to be weighing a sale of the chip-making equipment unit of Hitachi Kokusai. (FT)• SoftBank’s Vision Fund is in talks to invest up to $1.5 billion in Guazi.com, a Chinese used-car sales platform. (Reuters)• Maoyan Entertainment, a Chinese movie-ticket giant, fell 2.7 percent in its Hong Kong stock debut on Monday, the latest flubbed I.P.O. by a Chinese tech company. (Reuters)Politics and policy• The senators Chuck Schumer and Bernie Sanders have proposed limiting corporate stock buybacks. (NYT Op-Ed)• Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, reintroduced legislation aimed at strengthening enforcement of antitrust laws. (Reuters)• Michael Bloomberg is said to be reconsidering running for president as Democratic primary voters appear to be favoring more liberal contenders. (Axios)• President Trump declined to commit to making public any final report by the special prosecutor Robert Mueller. (NYT)Trade• Chinese state-owned firms bought a million tons of American soybeans on Friday, a day after talks on a trade deal between Beijing and Washington yielded progress. (NYT)• Despite a possible U.S.-China agreement, global trade continues to suffer. (WSJ)• European investment funds are worried about their ability to trade dual-listed stocks like those of Unilever and Shell if Britain leaves the E.U. without a deal. (FT)Tech• Venture capitalists are telling start-ups to stockpile cash ahead of a potential economic slowdown. (FT)• Meet the man behind the egg picture that became Instagram’s most-liked image. Surprise: He works in advertising. (NYT)• Cisco wants a U.S. version of Europe’s strict new data privacy rules. (FT)• How lawmakers plan to update tech in Congress — including its 2000-era internet connections. (WSJ)• Foxconn said it was still committed to building a factory in Wisconsin. (NYT)• It’s not just you: Captchas — which you complete to prove you’re not a robot — have gotten far harder. (Verge)Best of the rest• Vice Media plans to lay off 250 workers. Here’s what went wrong for the company and for other digital news organizations like BuzzFeed. (FT, NYT)• McKinsey advised the maker of OxyContin on how to “turbocharge” opioid sales, a lawsuit alleges. (NYT)• Why taxing the wealthy is so hard. (NYT)• Gains from President Trump’s corporate tax cuts aren’t as impressive as they first appeared. (WSJ)• How China got MSCI to add its market to one of the world’s best-known global benchmarks. (WSJ)• Ikea plans to test furniture leasing. (FT)• Hershey blames manufacturing processes for missing tips on its Kisses. (NYT)Thanks for reading! We’ll see you tomorrow.We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to business@nytimes.com.AdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page »newshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNewslettersNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation© 2019 The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptions